<h3>
PREFACE
</h3>

<p>
This book is founded on my experiences in the
Intelligence Department during the war, but rearranged
for the purposes of fiction.  Fact is a poor story-teller.
It starts a story at haphazard, generally long before the
beginning, rambles on inconsequently and tails off,
leaving loose ends hanging about, without a conclusion.
It works up to an interesting situation, and
then leaves it in the air to follow an issue that has
nothing to do with the point; it has no sense of climax
and whittles away its dramatic effects in irrelevance.
There is a school of novelists that looks upon this as the
proper model for fiction.  If life, they say, is arbitrary
and disconnected, why, fiction should be so too; for
fiction should imitate life.  In life things happen at
random, and that is how they should happen in a story;
they do not lead to a climax, which is an outrage to
probability, they just go on.  Nothing offends these
people more than the punch or the unexpected twist
with which some writers seek to surprise their readers,
and when the circumstances they relate seem to tend
towards a dramatic effect they do their best to avoid it.
They do not give you a story, they give you the material
on which you can invent your own.  Sometimes it
consists of an incident presented, you might think,
at haphazard, and you are invited to divine its
significance.  Sometimes they give you a character and
leave it at that.  They give you the materials for a dish
and expect you to do the cooking yourself.  Now this
is one way like another of writing stories and some very
good stories have been written in it.  Chekov used it with
mastery.  It is more suitable for the very short story than
for the longer one.  The description of a mood, an
environment or an atmosphere, can hold your attention for
half a dozen pages, but when it comes to fifty a story needs
a supporting skeleton.  The skeleton of a story is of
course its plot.  Now a plot has certain characteristics
that you cannot get away from.  It has a beginning, a
middle and an end.  It is complete in itself.  It starts with
a set of circumstances which have consequences, but of
which the causes may be ignored; and these consequences,
in their turn the cause of other circumstances,
are pursued till a point is reached when the
reader is satisfied that they are the cause of no further
consequences that need be considered.  This means that
a story should begin at a certain point and end at a certain
point.  It should not wander along an uncertain line,
but follow, from exposition to climax, a bold and
vigorous curve.  If you wanted to represent it
diagrammatically you would draw a semicircle.  It is very well
to have the element of surprise, and this punch, this
unexpected twist, which the imitators of Chekov
despise, is only bad when it is badly done; when it is an
integral part of the story and its logical issue it is
excellent.  There is nothing wrong in a climax, it is a
very natural demand of the reader; it is only wrong if it
does not follow naturally from the circumstances that
have gone before.  It is purely an affectation to elude it
because in life as a general rule things tail off
ineffectively.
</p>

<p>
For it is quite unnecessary to treat as axiomatic the
assertion that fiction should imitate life.  It is merely a
literary theory like another.  There is in fact a second
theory that is just as plausible, and this is that fiction
should use life merely as raw material which it arranges
in ingenious patterns.  You have a very good analogy in
painting.  The landscape painters of the seventeenth
century were not interested in the direct representation
of nature, which to them was no more than the occasion
for a formal decoration.  They constructed a scene
architecturally, balancing for example the mass of a
tree with the mass of a cloud, and used light and shade
to make a definite pattern.  Their intention was not to
portray a landscape but to create a work of art.  It was a
deliberate composition.  In their arrangement of the
facts of nature they were satisfied if they did not outrage
the spectator's sense of reality.  It was left for the
Impressionists to paint what they saw.  They tried to
catch nature in its fleeting beauty; they were content to
render the radiance of sunlight, the colour of shadows
or the translucency of the air.  They aimed at truth.
They wanted a painter to be no more than an eye and a
hand.  They despised intelligence.  It is strange how
empty their paintings look now when you place them
beside the stately pictures of Claude.  The method of
Claude is the method of that master of the short story
Guy de Maupassant.  It is a very good one and I have a
notion that it will survive the other.  Already it is
getting a little difficult to care much what middle-class
Russians were like fifty years ago, and the anecdote in
Chekov's stories is not as a rule absorbing enough (as
the story of Paolo and Francesca or of Macbeth is
absorbing) to hold your attention apart from your
interest in the people.  The method of which I speak is
that which chooses from life what is curious, telling and
dramatic; it does not seek to copy life, but keeps to it
closely enough not to shock the reader into disbelief; it
leaves out this and changes that; it makes a formal
decoration out of such of the facts as it has found
convenient to deal with and presents a picture, the
result of artifice, which, because it represents the
author's temperament, is to a certain extent a portrait
of himself, but which is designed to excite, interest
and absorb the reader.  If it is a success he accepts it as
true.
</p>

<p>
I have written all this in order to impress upon
the reader that this book is a work of fiction, though
I should say not much more so than several of the books
on the same subject that have appeared during the last
few years and that purport to be truthful memoirs.  The
work of an agent in the Intelligence Department is on
the whole extremely monotonous.  A lot of it is
uncommonly useless.  The material it offers for stories is
scrappy and pointless; the author has himself to make
it coherent, dramatic and probable.
</p>

<p>
In 1917 I went to Russia.  I was sent to prevent the
Bolshevik Revolution and to keep Russia in the war.
The reader will know that my efforts did not meet with
success.  I went to Petrograd from Vladivostock.  One
day, on the way through Siberia, the train stopped at
some station and the passengers as usual got out, some
to fetch water to make tea, some to buy food and others
to stretch their legs.  A blind soldier was sitting on a
bench.  Other soldiers sat beside him and more stood
behind.  There were from twenty to thirty.  Their
uniforms were torn and stained.  The blind soldier, a
big, vigorous fellow, was quite young.  On his cheeks
was the soft, pale down of a beard that has never been
shaved.  I daresay he wasn't eighteen.  He had a broad
face, with flat, wide features; and on his forehead was
a great scar of the wound that had lost him his sight.
His closed eyes gave him a strangely vacant look.
He began to sing.  His voice was strong and sweet.  He
accompanied himself on an accordion.  The train
waited on and he sang song after song.  I could not
understand his words, but through his singing, wild
and melancholy, I seemed to hear the cry of the
oppressed: I felt the lonely steppes and the interminable
forests, the flow of the broad Russian rivers and all the
toil of the countryside, the ploughing of the land and
the reaping of the ripe corn, the sighing of the wind in
the birch trees, the long months of dark winter; and
then the dancing of women in the villages and the
youths bathing in shallow streams on summer evenings;
I felt the horror of war, the bitter nights in the trenches,
the long marches on muddy roads, the battlefield with
its terror and anguish and death.  It was horrible and
deeply moving.  A cap lay at the singer's feet and the
passengers filled it full of money; the same emotion had
seized them all, of boundless compassion and of vague
horror, for there was something in that blind, scarred
face that was terrifying; you felt that this was a being
apart, sundered from the joy of this enchanting world.
He did not seem quite human.  The soldiers stood
silent and hostile.  Their attitude seemed to claim as
a right the alms of the travelling herd.  There was a
disdainful anger on their side and immeasurable pity
on ours; but no glimmering of a sense that there was
but one way to compensate that helpless man for all
his pain.
</p>

<p><br /><br /><br /></p>

<p><a id="chap01"></a></p>

<h2>
ASHENDEN
</h2>

<h3>
<br /><br />
I
<br /><br />
R.
</h3>

<p>
It was not till the beginning of September that
Ashenden, a writer by profession, who had been
abroad at the outbreak of the war, managed to
get back to England.  He chanced soon after his arrival
to go to a party and was there introduced to a middle-aged
Colonel whose name he did not catch.  He had
some talk with him.  As he was about to leave this officer
came up to him and asked:
</p>

<p>
"I say, I wonder if you'd mind coming to see me.
I'd rather like to have a chat with you."
</p>

<p>
"Certainly," said Ashenden.  "Whenever you like."
</p>

<p>
"What about to-morrow at eleven?"
</p>

<p>
"All right."
</p>

<p>
"I'll just write down my address.  Have you a card
on you?"
</p>

<p>
Ashenden gave him one and on this the Colonel
scribbled in pencil the name of a street and the number
of a house.  When Ashenden walked along next morning
to keep his appointment he found himself in a street
of rather vulgar red-brick houses in a part of London
that had once been fashionable, but was now fallen in
the esteem of the house-hunter who wanted a good
address.  On the house at which Ashenden had been
asked to call there was a board up to announce that it
was for sale, the shutters were closed and there was no
sign that anyone lived in it.  He rang the bell and the
door was opened by a non-commissioned officer so
promptly that he was startled.  He was not asked his
business, but led immediately into a long room at the
back, once evidently a dining-room, the florid
decoration of which looked oddly out of keeping with the
office furniture, shabby and sparse, that was in it.  It
gave Ashenden the impression of a room in which the
brokers had taken possession.  The Colonel, who was
known in the Intelligence Department, as Ashenden
later discovered, by the letter R., rose when he came in
and shook hands with him.  He was a man somewhat
above the middle height, lean, with a yellow,
deeply-lined face, thin grey hair and a toothbrush moustache.
The thing immediately noticeable about him was the
closeness with which his blue eyes were set.  He only
just escaped a squint.  They were hard and cruel eyes,
and very wary; and they gave him a cunning, shifty look.
Here was a man that you could neither like nor trust
at first sight.  His manner was pleasant and cordial.
</p>

<p>
He asked Ashenden a good many questions and then,
without further to-do, suggested that he had particular
qualifications for the secret service.  Ashenden was
acquainted with several European languages and his
profession was excellent cover; on the pretext that he
was writing a book he could without attracting attention
visit any neutral country.  It was while they were
discussing this point that R. said:
</p>

<p>
"You know you ought to get material that would be
very useful to you in your work."
</p>

<p>
"I shouldn't mind that," said Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"I'll tell you an incident that occurred only the other
day and I can vouch for its truth.  I thought at the time
it would make a damned good story.  One of the French
ministers went down to Nice to recover from a cold
and he had some very important documents with him
that he kept in a dispatch-case.  They were very
important indeed.  Well, a day or two after he arrived he
picked up a yellow-haired lady at some restaurant or
other where there was dancing, and he got very friendly
with her.  To cut a long story short, he took her back
to his hotel&mdash;of course it was a very imprudent thing
to do&mdash;and when he came to himself in the morning
the lady and the dispatch-case had disappeared.  They
had one or two drinks up in his room and his theory
is that when his back was turned the woman slipped
a drug into his glass."
</p>

<p>
R. finished and looked at Ashenden with a gleam in
his close-set eyes.
</p>

<p>
"Dramatic, isn't it?" he asked.
</p>

<p>
"Do you mean to say that happened the other day?"
</p>

<p>
"The week before last."
</p>

<p>
"Impossible," cried Ashenden.  "Why, we've been
putting that incident on the stage for sixty years, we've
written it in a thousand novels.  Do you mean to say
that life has only just caught up with us?"
</p>

<p>
R. was a trifle disconcerted.
</p>

<p>
"Well, if necessary, I could give you names and dates,
and believe me, the Allies have been put to no end of
trouble by the loss of the documents that the
dispatch-case contained."
</p>

<p>
"Well, sir, if you can't do better than that in the secret
service," sighed Ashenden, "I'm afraid that as a source
of inspiration to the writer of fiction it's a washout.
We really can't write that story much longer."
</p>

<p>
It did not take them long to settle things and when
Ashenden rose to go he had already made careful note
of his instructions.  He was to start for Geneva next
day.  The last words that R. said to him, with a
casualness that made them impressive, were:
</p>

<p>
"There's just one thing I think you ought to know
before you take on this job.  And don't forget it.  If
you do well you'll get no thanks and if you get into
trouble you'll get no help.  Does that suit you?"
</p>

<p>
"Perfectly."
</p>

<p>
"Then I'll wish you good afternoon."
</p>

<p><br /><br /><br /></p>

<p><a id="chap02"></a></p>

<h3>
II
<br /><br />
<i>A Domiciliary Visit</i>
</h3>

<p>
Ashenden was on his way back to Geneva.
The night was stormy and the wind blew
cold from the mountains, but the stodgy little
steamer plodded sturdily through the choppy
waters of the lake.  A scudding rain, just turning into
sleet, swept the deck in angry gusts, like a nagging
woman who cannot leave a subject alone.  Ashenden
had been to France in order to write and dispatch a
report.  A day or two before, about five in the afternoon,
an Indian agent of his had come to see him in his rooms;
it was only by a lucky chance that he was in, for he had
no appointment with him, and the agent's instructions
were to come to the hotel only in a case of urgent
importance.  He told Ashenden that a Bengali in the
German service had recently come from Berlin with a
black cane trunk in which were a number of documents
interesting to the British Government.  At that time the
Central Powers were doing their best to foment such
an agitation in India as would make it necessary for
Great Britain to keep their troops in the country and
perhaps send others from France.  It had been found
possible to get the Bengali arrested in Berne on a charge
that would keep him out of harm's way for a while,
but the black cane trunk could not be found.  Ashenden's
agent was a very brave and very clever fellow and he
mixed freely with such of his countrymen as were
disaffected to the interests of Great Britain.  He had just
discovered that the Bengali before going to Berne had,
for greater safety, left the trunk in the cloak-room at
Zürich Station, and now that he was in jail, awaiting
trial, was unable to get the <i>bulletin</i> by which it might
be obtained into the hands of any of his confederates.
It was a matter of great urgency for the German
Intelligence Department to secure the contents of the trunk
without delay, and since it was impossible for them to
get hold of it by the ordinary official means, they had
decided to break into the station that very night and
steal it.  It was a bold and ingenious scheme and Ashenden
felt a pleasant exhilaration (for a great deal of his
work was uncommonly dull) when he heard of it.  He
recognised the dashing and unscrupulous touch of the
head of the German secret service at Berne.  But the
burglary was arranged for two o'clock on the following
morning and there was not a moment to lose.  He could
trust neither the telegraph nor the telephone to
communicate with the British officer at Berne, and since the
Indian agent could not go (he was taking his life in his
hands by coming to see Ashenden and if he were noticed
leaving his room it might easily be that he would be
found one day floating in the lake with a knife-thrust in
his back), there was nothing for it but to go himself.
</p>

<p>
There was a train to Berne that he could just catch
and he put on his hat and coat as he ran downstairs.
He jumped into a cab.  Four hours later he rang the bell
of the headquarters of the Intelligence Department.  His
name was known there but to one person, and it was
for him that Ashenden asked.  A tall tired-looking
man, whom he had not met before, came out and
without a word led him into an office.  Ashenden
told him his errand.  The tall man looked at his watch.
</p>

<p>
"It's too late for us to do anything ourselves.  We
couldn't possibly get to Zürich in time."
</p>

<p>
He reflected.
</p>

<p>
"We'll put the Swiss authorities on the job.  They can
telephone, and when your friends attempt their little
burglary, I have no doubt they'll find the station well
guarded.  Anyhow, you had better get back to Geneva."
</p>

<p>
He shook hands with Ashenden and showed him out.
Ashenden was well aware that he would never know
what happened then.  Being no more than a tiny rivet in
a vast and complicated machine, he never had the
advantage of seeing a completed action.  He was concerned
with the beginning or the end of it, perhaps, or with
some incident in the middle, but what his own doings
led to he had seldom a chance of discovering.  It was as
unsatisfactory as those modern novels that give you a
number of unrelated episodes and expect you by piecing
them together to construct in your mind a connected
narrative.
</p>

<p>
Notwithstanding his fur coat and his muffler, Ashenden
was chilled to the bone.  It was warm in the saloon
and there were good lights to read by, but he thought
it better not to sit there in case some habitual traveller,
recognising him, wondered why he made these constant
journeys between Geneva in Switzerland and Thonon
in France; and so, making the best of what shelter could
be found, he passed the tedious time in the darkness of
the deck.  He looked in the direction of Geneva, but
could see no lights, and the sleet, turning into snow,
prevented him from recognising the landmarks.  Lake
Leman, on fine days so trim and pretty, artificial like a
piece of water in a French garden, in this tempestuous
weather was as secret and as menacing as the sea.  He
made up his mind that, on getting back to his hotel, he
would have a fire lit in his sitting-room, a hot bath, and
dinner comfortably by the fireside in pyjamas and a
dressing-gown.  The prospect of spending an evening
by himself with his pipe and a book was so agreeable
that it made the misery of that journey across the lake
positively worth while.  Two sailors tramped past him
heavily, their heads bent down to save themselves from
the sleet that blew in their faces, and one of them
shouted to him: <i>Nous arrivons</i>; they went to the side and
withdrew a bar to allow passage for the gangway, and
looking again Ashenden through the howling darkness
saw mistily the lights of the quay.  A welcome sight.
In two or three minutes the steamer was made fast and
Ashenden, muffled to the eyes, joined himself to the little
knot of passengers that waited to step ashore.  Though
he made the journey so often&mdash;it was his duty to cross
the lake into France once a week to deliver his reports
and to receive instructions&mdash;he had always a faint sense
of trepidation when he stood among the crowd at the
gangway and waited to land.  There was nothing on his
passport to show that he had been in France; the steamer
went round the lake touching French soil at two places,
but going from Switzerland to Switzerland, so that his
journey might have been to Vevey or to Lausanne; but
he could never be sure that the secret police had not
taken note of him, and if he had been followed and seen
to land in France, the fact that there was no stamp on
his passport would be difficult to explain.  Of course
he had his story ready, but he well knew that it was not
a very convincing one, and though it might be impossible
for the Swiss authorities to prove that he was anything
but a casual traveller, he might nevertheless spend two
or three days in jail, which would be uncomfortable, and
then be firmly conducted to the frontier, which would
be mortifying.  The Swiss knew well that their country
was the scene of all manner of intrigues; agents of the
secret service, spies, revolutionaries and agitators
infested the hotels of the principal towns and, jealous of
their neutrality, they were determined to prevent
conduct that might embroil them with any of the belligerent
powers.
</p>

<p>
There were as usual two police officers on the quay
to watch the passengers disembark and Ashenden,
walking past them with as unconcerned an air as he could
assume, was relieved when he had got safely by.  The
darkness swallowed him up and he stepped out briskly
for his hotel.  The wild weather with a scornful gesture
had swept all the neatness from the trim promenade.
The shops were closed and Ashenden passed only an
occasional pedestrian who sidled along, scrunched up,
as though he fled from the blind wrath of the unknown.
You had a feeling in that black and bitter night that
civilisation, ashamed of its artificiality, cowered before
the fury of elemental things.  It was hail now that blew
in Ashenden's face and the pavement was wet and
slippery so that he had to walk with caution.  The hotel
faced the lake.  When he reached it and a page-boy
opened the door for him, he entered the hall with a
flurry of wind that sent the papers on the porter's desk
flying into the air.  Ashenden was dazzled by the light.
He stopped to ask the porter if there were letters for him.
There was nothing, and he was about to get into the
lift when the porter told him that two gentlemen were
waiting in his room to see him.  Ashenden had no
friends in Geneva.
</p>

<p>
"Oh?" he answered, not a little surprised.  "Who are they?"
</p>

<p>
He had taken care to get on friendly terms with the
porter and his tips for trifling services had been
generous.  The porter gave a discreet smile.
</p>

<p>
"There is no harm in telling you.  I think they are
members of the police."
</p>

<p>
"What do they want?" asked Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"They did not say.  They asked me where you were,
and I told them you had gone for a walk.  They said
they would wait till you came back."
</p>

<p>
"How long have they been there?"
</p>

<p>
"An hour."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden's heart sank, but he took care not to let his
face betray his concern.
</p>

<p>
"I'll go up and see them," he said.  The liftman stood
aside to let him step into the lift, but Ashenden shook
his head.  "I'm so cold," he said, "I'll walk up."
</p>

<p>
He wished to give himself a moment to think, but as
he ascended the three flights slowly his feet were like
lead.  There could be small doubt why two police
officers were so bent upon seeing him.  He felt on a
sudden dreadfully tired.  He did not feel he could cope
with a multitude of questions.  And if he were arrested
as a secret agent he must spend at least the night in a
cell.  He longed more than ever for a hot bath and a
pleasant dinner by his fireside.  He had half a mind to
turn tail and walk out of the hotel, leaving everything
behind him; he had his passport in his pocket and he
knew by heart the hours at which trains started for the
frontier: before the Swiss authorities had made up their
minds what to do he would be in safety.  But he
continued to trudge upstairs.  He did not like the notion of
abandoning his job so easily, he had been sent to
Geneva, knowing the risks, to do work of a certain
kind, and it seemed to him that he had better go
through with it.  Of course it would not be very nice to
spend two years in a Swiss prison, but the chance of this
was, like assassination to kings, one of the
inconveniences of his profession.  He reached the landing of
the third floor and walked to his room.  Ashenden had
in him, it seems, a strain of flippancy (on account of
which, indeed, the critics had often reproached him) and
as he stood for a moment outside the door his
predicament appeared to him on a sudden rather droll.
His spirits went up and he determined to brazen the
thing out.  It was with a genuine smile on his lips that he
turned the handle and entering the room faced his
visitors.
</p>

<p>
"Good evening, gentlemen," said he.
</p>

<p>
The room was brightly lit, for all the lights were on,
and a fire burned in the hearth.  The air was grey with
smoke, since the strangers, finding it long to wait for
him, had been smoking strong and inexpensive cigars.
They sat in their great-coats and bowler-hats as though
they had only just that moment come in; but the ashes
in the little tray on the table would alone have suggested
that they had been long enough there to make themselves
familiar with their surroundings.  They were two
powerful men, with black moustaches, on the stout side,
heavily built, and they reminded Ashenden of Fafner
and Fasolt, the giants in <i>The Rhinegold</i>; their clumsy
boots, the massive way they sat in their chairs and the
ponderous alertness of their expression, made it obvious
that they were members of the detective force.  Ashenden
gave his room an enveloping glance.  He was a neat
creature and saw at once that his things, though not in
disorder, were not as he had left them.  He guessed that
an examination had been made of his effects.  That did
not disturb him, for he kept in his room no document
that would compromise him; his code he had learned by
heart and destroyed before leaving England, and such
communications as reached him from Germany were
handed to him by third parties and transmitted without
delay to the proper places.  There was nothing he need
fear in a search, but the impression that it had been
made confirmed his suspicion that he had been
denounced to the authorities as a secret agent.
</p>

<p>
"What can I do for you, gentlemen?" he asked
affably.  "It's warm in here, wouldn't you like to take off
your coats&mdash;and hats?"
</p>

<p>
It faintly irritated him that they should sit there with
their hats on.
</p>

<p>
"We're only staying a minute," said one of them.
"We were passing and as the <i>concierge</i> said you would be
in at once, we thought we would wait."
</p>

<p>
He did not remove his hat.  Ashenden unwrapped his
scarf and disembarrassed himself of his heavy coat.
</p>

<p>
"Won't you have a cigar?" he asked, offering the box
to the two detectives in turn.
</p>

<p>
"I don't mind if I do," said the first, Fafner, taking
one, upon which the second, Fasolt, helped himself
without a word, even of thanks.
</p>

<p>
The name on the box appeared to have a singular
effect on their manners, for both now took off their
hats.
</p>

<p>
"You must have had a very disagreeable walk in this
bad weather," said Fafner, as he bit half an inch off the
end of his cigar and spat it in the fire-place.
</p>

<p>
Now it was Ashenden's principle (a good one in life
as well as in the Intelligence Department) always to tell
as much of the truth as he conveniently could; so he
answered as follows:
</p>

<p>
"What do you take me for?  I wouldn't go out in such
weather if I could help it.  I had to go to Vevey to-day
to see an invalid friend and I came back by boat.  It was
bitter on the lake."
</p>

<p>
"We come from the police," said Fafner casually.
</p>

<p>
Ashenden thought they must consider him a perfect
idiot if they imagined he had not long discovered that,
but it was not a piece of information to which it was
discreet to reply with a pleasantry.
</p>

<p>
"Oh, really," he said.
</p>

<p>
"Have you your passport on you?"
</p>

<p>
"Yes.  In these war-times I think a foreigner is wise
always to keep his passport on him."
</p>

<p>
"Very wise."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden handed the man the nice new passport
which gave no information about his movements other
than that he had come from London three months before
and had since then crossed no frontier.  The detective
looked at it carefully and passed it on to his colleague.
</p>

<p>
"It appears to be all in order," he said.
</p>

<p>
Ashenden, standing in front of the fire to warm
himself, a cigarette between his lips, made no reply.
He watched the detectives warily, but with an
expression, he flattered himself, of amiable unconcern.
Fasolt handed back the passport to Fafner, who tapped
it reflectively with a thick forefinger.
</p>

<p>
"The chief of police told us to come here," he said,
and Ashenden was conscious that both of them now
looked at him with attention, "to make a few enquiries
of you."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden knew that when you have nothing apposite
to say it is better to hold your tongue; and when a man
has made a remark that calls to his mind for an answer,
he is apt to find silence a trifle disconcerting.  Ashenden
waited for the detective to proceed.  He was not quite
sure, but it seemed to him that he hesitated.
</p>

<p>
"It appears that there have been a good many complaints
lately of the noise that people make when they
come out of the Casino late at night.  We wish to know
if you personally have been troubled by the disturbance.
It is evident that as your rooms look on the lake and
the revellers pass your windows, if the noise is serious,
you must have heard it."
</p>

<p>
For an instant Ashenden was dumbfounded.  What
balderdash was this the detective was talking to him
(boom, boom, he heard the big drum as the giant
lumbered on the scene), and why on earth should the
chief of police send to him to find out if his beauty sleep
had been disturbed by vociferous gamblers?  It looked
very like a trap.  But nothing is so foolish as to ascribe
profundity to what on the surface is merely inept; it is a
pitfall into which many an ingenuous reviewer has fallen
headlong.  Ashenden had a confident belief in the
stupidity of the human animal, which in the course of
his life had stood him in good stead.  It flashed across
him that if the detective asked him such a question it was
because he had no shadow of proof that he was engaged
in any illegal practice.  It was clear that he had been
denounced, but no evidence had been offered, and the
search of his rooms had been fruitless.  But what a silly
excuse was this to make for a visit and what a poverty of
invention it showed!  Ashenden immediately thought of
three reasons the detectives might have given for
seeking an interview with him and he wished that he
were on terms sufficiently familiar with them to make
the suggestions.  This was really an insult to the
intelligence.  These men were even stupider than he
thought; but Ashenden had always a soft corner in his
heart for the stupid and now he looked upon them with
a feeling of unexpected kindliness.  He would have liked
to pat them gently.  But he answered the question with
gravity.
</p>

<p>
"To tell you the truth, I am a very sound sleeper (the
result doubtless of a pure heart and an easy conscience),
and I have never heard a thing."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden looked at them for the faint smile that he
thought his remark deserved, but their countenances
remained stolid.  Ashenden, as well as an agent of the
British Government, was a humorist, and he stifled the
beginnings of a sigh.  He assumed a slightly imposing
air and adopted a more serious tone.
</p>

<p>
"But even if I had been awakened by noisy people I
should not dream of complaining.  At a time when
there is so much trouble, misery and unhappiness
in the world, I cannot but think it very wrong to
disturb the amusement of persons who are lucky
enough to be able to amuse themselves."
</p>

<p>
"<i>En effet</i>," said the detective.  "But the fact remains
that people have been disturbed and the chief of police
thought the matter should be enquired into."
</p>

<p>
His colleague, who had hitherto preserved a silence
that was positively sphinx-like, now broke it.
</p>

<p>
"I notice by your passport that you are an author,
<i>monsieur</i>," he said.
</p>

<p>
Ashenden in reaction from his previous perturbation
was feeling exceedingly debonair and he
answered with good humour:
</p>

<p>
"It is true.  It is a profession full of tribulation, but it
has now and then its compensations."
</p>

<p>
"<i>La gloire</i>," said Fafner politely.
</p>

<p>
"Or shall we say notoriety?" hazarded Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"And what are you doing in Geneva?"
</p>

<p>
The question was put so pleasantly that Ashenden
felt it behoved him to be on his guard.  A police officer
amiable is more dangerous to the wise than a police
officer aggressive.
</p>

<p>
"I am writing a play," said Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
He waved his hand to the papers on his table.  Four
eyes followed his gesture.  A casual glance told him that
the detectives had looked and taken note of his
manuscripts.
</p>

<p>
"And why should you write a play here rather than in
your own country?"
</p>

<p>
Ashenden smiled upon them with even more affability
than before, since this was a question for which he
had long been prepared, and it was a relief to give the
answer.  He was curious to see how it would go down.
</p>

<p>
"<i>Mais, monsieur</i>, there is the war.  My country is in a
turmoil, it would be impossible to sit there quietly and
write a play."
</p>

<p>
"Is it a comedy or a tragedy?"
</p>

<p>
"Oh, a comedy, and a light one at that," replied
Ashenden.  "The artist needs peace and quietness.
How do you expect him to preserve that detachment of
spirit that is demanded by creative work unless he can
have perfect tranquillity?  Switzerland has the good
fortune to be neutral, and it seemed to me that in
Geneva I should find the very surroundings I wanted."
</p>

<p>
Fafner nodded slightly to Fasolt, but whether to
indicate that he thought Ashenden an imbecile or
whether in sympathy with his desire for a safe retreat
from a turbulent world, Ashenden had no means of
knowing.  Anyhow the detective evidently came to the
conclusion that he could learn nothing more from
talking to Ashenden, for his remarks grew now
desultory and in a few minutes he rose to go.
</p>

<p>
When Ashenden, having warmly shaken their hands,
closed the door behind the pair he heaved a great sigh of
relief.  He turned on the water for his bath, as hot as he
thought he could possibly bear it, and as he undressed
reflected comfortably over his escape.
</p>

<p>
The day before, an incident had occurred that had left
him on his guard.  There was in his service a Swiss,
known in the Intelligence Department as Bernard, who
had recently come from Germany, and Ashenden had
instructed him to go to a certain café desiring to see
him, at a certain time.  Since he had not seen him before,
so that there might be no mistake he had informed him
through an intermediary what question himself would
ask and what reply he was to give.  He chose the
luncheon hour for the meeting, since then the café was
unlikely to be crowded and it chanced that on entering
he saw but one man of about the age he knew Bernard
to be.  He was by himself and going up to him Ashenden
casually put to him the pre-arranged question.  The
pre-arranged answer was given, and sitting down
beside him, Ashenden ordered himself a Dubonnet.
The spy was a stocky little fellow, shabbily dressed,
with a bullet-shaped head, close-cropped, fair, with
shifty blue eyes and a sallow skin.  He did not inspire
confidence, and but that Ashenden knew by experience
how hard it was to find men willing to go into Germany
he would have been surprised that his predecessor had
engaged him.  He was a German-Swiss and spoke
French with a strong accent.  He immediately asked for
his wages and these Ashenden passed over to him in an
envelope.  They were in Swiss francs.  He gave a
general account of his stay in Germany and answered
Ashenden's careful questions.  He was by calling a
waiter and had found a job in a restaurant near one of
the Rhine bridges, which gave him good opportunity
to get the information that was required of him.  His
reasons for coming to Switzerland for a few days were
plausible and there could apparently be no difficulty in
his crossing the frontier on his return.  Ashenden
expressed his satisfaction with his behaviour, gave him
his orders and was prepared to finish the interview.
</p>

<p>
"Very good," said Bernard.  "But before I go back to
Germany I want two thousand francs."
</p>

<p>
"Do you?"
</p>

<p>
"Yes, and I want them now, before you leave this
café.  It's a sum I have to pay, and I've got to have it."
</p>

<p>
"I'm afraid I can't give it to you."
</p>

<p>
A scowl made the man's face even more unpleasant to
look at than it was before.
</p>

<p>
"You've got to."
</p>

<p>
"What makes you think that?"
</p>

<p>
The spy leaned forward and, not raising his voice, but
speaking so that only Ashenden could hear, burst out
angrily:
</p>

<p>
"Do you think I'm going on risking my life for that
beggarly sum you give me?  Not ten days ago a man
was caught at Mainz and shot.  Was that one of your men?"
</p>

<p>
"We haven't got anyone at Mainz," said Ashenden,
carelessly, and for all he knew it was true.  He had been
puzzled not to receive his usual communications from
that place and Bernard's information might afford the
explanation.  "You knew exactly what you were to get
when you took on the job, and if you weren't satisfied
you needn't have taken it.  I have no authority to give
you a penny more."
</p>

<p>
"Do you see what I've got here?" said Bernard.
</p>

<p>
He took a small revolver out of his pocket and
fingered it significantly.
</p>

<p>
"What are you going to do with it?  Pawn it?"
</p>

<p>
With an angry shrug of the shoulders he put it back
in his pocket.  Ashenden reflected that had he known
anything of the technique of the theatre Bernard would
have been aware that it was useless to make a gesture
that had no ulterior meaning.
</p>

<p>
"You refuse to give me the money?"
</p>

<p>
"Certainly."
</p>

<p>
The spy's manner, which at first had been obsequious,
was now somewhat truculent, but he kept his head and
never for a moment raised his voice.  Ashenden could
see that Bernard, however big a ruffian, was a reliable
agent, and he made up his mind to suggest to R. that his
salary should be raised.  The scene diverted him.  A
little way off two fat citizens of Geneva, with black
beards, were playing dominoes, and on the other side a
young man with spectacles was with great rapidity
writing sheet after sheet of an immensely long letter.  A
Swiss family (who knows, perhaps Robinson by name),
consisting of a father and mother and four children,
were sitting round a table making the best of two small
cups of coffee.  The <i>caissière</i> behind the counter, an
imposing brunette with a large bust encased in black
silk, was reading the local paper.  The surroundings
made the melodramatic scene in which Ashenden was
engaged perfectly grotesque.  His own play seemed to
him much more real.
</p>

<p>
Bernard smiled.  His smile was not engaging.
</p>

<p>
"Do you know that I have only to go to the police
and tell them about you to have you arrested?  Do you
know what a Swiss prison is like?"
</p>

<p>
"No, I've often wondered lately.  Do you?"
</p>

<p>
"Yes, and you wouldn't much like it."
</p>

<p>
One of the things that had bothered Ashenden was
the possibility that he would be arrested before he
finished his play.  He disliked the notion of leaving it
half done for an indefinite period.  He did not know
whether he would be treated as a political prisoner or as
a common criminal and he had a mind to ask Bernard
whether in the latter case (the only one Bernard was
likely to know anything about) he would be allowed
writing materials.  He was afraid Bernard would think
the inquiry an attempt to laugh at him.  But he was
feeling comparatively at ease and was able to answer
Bernard's threat without heat.
</p>

<p>
"You could of course get me sentenced to two years'
imprisonment."
</p>

<p>
"At least."
</p>

<p>
"No, that is the maximum, I understand, and I think
it is quite enough.  I won't conceal from you that I
should find it extremely disagreeable.  But not nearly so
disagreeable as you would."
</p>

<p>
"What could you do?"
</p>

<p>
"Oh, we'd get you somehow.  And after all, the war
won't last for ever.  You are a waiter, you want your
freedom of action.  I promise you that if I get into any
trouble, you will never be admitted into any of the
allied countries for the rest of your life.  I can't help
thinking it would cramp your style."
</p>

<p>
Bernard did not reply, but looked down sulkily at the
marble-topped table.  Ashenden thought this was the
moment to pay for the drinks and go.
</p>

<p>
"Think it over, Bernard," he said.  "If you want to go
back to your job, you have your instructions, and your
usual wages shall be paid through the usual channels."
</p>

<p>
The spy shrugged his shoulders, and Ashenden,
though not knowing in the least what was the result of
their conversation, felt that it behoved him to walk out
with dignity.  He did so.
</p>

<p>
And now as he carefully put one foot into the bath,
wondering if he could bear it, he asked himself what
Bernard had in the end decided on.  The water was just
not scalding and he gradually let himself down into it.
On the whole it seemed to him that the spy had thought
it would be as well to go straight, and the source of his
denunciation must be looked for elsewhere.  Perhaps in
the hotel itself.  Ashenden lay back, and as his body
grew used to the heat of the water gave a sigh of
satisfaction.
</p>

<p>
"Really," he reflected, "there are moments in life
when all this to-do that has led from the primeval slime
to myself seems almost worth while."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden could not but think he was lucky to have
wriggled out of the fix he had found himself in that
afternoon.  Had he been arrested and in due course
sentenced R., shrugging his shoulders, would merely
have called him a damned fool and set about looking for
someone to take his place.  Already Ashenden knew his
chief well enough to be aware that when he had told
him that if he got into trouble he need look for no help
he meant exactly what he said.
</p>

<p><br /><br /><br /></p>

<p><a id="chap03"></a></p>

<h3>
III
<br /><br />
<i>Miss King</i>
</h3>

<p>
Ashenden, lying comfortably in his bath,
was glad to think that in all probability he
would be able to finish his play in peace.  The
police had drawn a blank and though they might watch
him from now on with some care it was unlikely that
they would take a further step until he had at least
roughed out his third act.  It behoved him to be
prudent (only a fortnight ago his colleague at Lausanne
had been sentenced to a term of imprisonment), but it
would be foolish to be alarmed: his predecessor in
Geneva, seeing himself, with an exaggerated sense of
his own importance, shadowed from morning till night,
had been so affected by the nervous strain that it had
been found necessary to withdraw him.  Twice a week
Ashenden had to go to the market to receive
instructions that were brought to him by an old peasant
woman from French Savoy who sold butter and eggs.
She came in with the other market-women and the
search at the frontier was perfunctory.  It was barely
dawn when they crossed and the officials were only too
glad to have done quickly with these chattering noisy
women and get back to their warm fires and their cigars.
Indeed this old lady looked so bland and innocent, with
her corpulence, her fat red face, and her smiling
good-natured mouth, it would have been a very astute
detective who could imagine that if he took the trouble
to put his hand deep down between those voluminous
breasts of hers, he would find a little piece or paper that
would land in the dock an honest old woman (who
kept her son out of the trenches by taking this risk) and
an English writer approaching middle-age.  Ashenden
went to the market about nine when the housewives of
Geneva for the most part had done their provisioning,
stopped in front of the basket by the side of which, rain
or wind, hot or cold, sat that indomitable creature and
bought half a pound of butter.  She slipped the note into
his hand when he was given change for ten francs and he
sauntered away.  His only moment of risk was when he
walked back to his hotel with the paper in his pocket,
and after this scare he made up his mind to shorten as
much as possible the period during which it could be
found on him.
</p>

<p>
Ashenden sighed, for the water was no longer quite so
hot; he could not reach the tap with his hand nor could
he turn it with his toes (as every properly regulated tap
should turn) and if he got up enough to add more hot
water he might just as well get out altogether.  On the
other hand he could not pull out the plug with his foot
in order to empty the bath and so force himself to get
out, nor could he find in himself the will-power to step
out of it like a man.  He had often heard people tell him
that he possessed character and he reflected that people
judge hastily in the affairs of life because they judge on
insufficient evidence: they had never seen him in a hot,
but diminishingly hot, bath.  His mind, however,
wandered back to his play, and telling himself jokes and
repartees that he knew by bitter experience would never
look so neat on paper nor sound so well on the stage as
they did then, he abstracted his mind from the fact that
his bath was growing almost tepid, when he heard a
knock at the door.  Since he did not want anyone to
enter, he had the presence of mind not to say "come in,"
but the knocking was repeated.
</p>

<p>
"Who is it?" he cried irascibly.
</p>

<p>
"A letter."
</p>

<p>
"Come in then.  Wait a minute."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden heard his bedroom-door open and getting
out of the bath flung a towel round him and went in.
A page-boy was waiting with a note.  It needed only a
verbal answer.  It was from a lady staying in the hotel
asking him to play bridge after dinner and was signed
in the continental fashion Baronne de Higgins.
Ashenden, longing for a cosy meal in his own room, in
slippers and with a book leaned up against a reading-lamp,
was about to refuse when it occurred to him that
under the circumstances it might be discreet to show
himself in the dining-room that night.  It was absurd to
suppose that in that hotel the news would not have
spread that he had been visited by the police and it
would be as well to prove to his fellow-guests that he
was not disconcerted.  It had passed through his mind
that it might be someone in the hotel who had
denounced him and indeed the name of the sprightly
baroness had not failed to suggest itself to him.  If it was
she who had given him away there would be a certain
humour in playing bridge with her.  He gave the boy a
message that he would be pleased to come and
proceeded slowly to don his evening clothes.
</p>

<p>
The Baroness von Higgins was an Austrian, who on
settling in Geneva during the first winter of the war,
had found it convenient to make her name look as
French as possible.  She spoke English and French
perfectly.  Her surname, so far from Teutonic, she owed
to her grandfather, a Yorkshire stable-boy, who had
been taken over to Austria by a Prince Blankenstein
early in the nineteenth century.  He had had a charming
and romantic career; a very good-looking young man,
he attracted the attention of one of the arch-duchesses
and then made such good use of his opportunities that
he ended his life as a baron and minister plenipotentiary
to an Italian court.  The baroness, his only descendant,
after an unhappy marriage, the particulars of which she
was fond of relating to her acquaintance, had resumed
her maiden name.  She mentioned not infrequently the
fact that her grandfather had been an ambassador, but
never that he had been a stable-boy and Ashenden had
learned this interesting detail from Vienna; for as he
grew friendly with her he had thought it necessary to
get a few particulars about her past, and he knew
among other things that her private income did not
permit her to live on the somewhat lavish scale on
which she was living in Geneva.  Since she had so many
advantages for espionage, it was fairly safe to suppose
that an alert secret service had enlisted her services and
Ashenden took it for granted that she was engaged
somehow on the same kind of work as himself.  It
increased if anything the cordiality of his relations with
her.
</p>

<p>
When he went into the dining-room it was already
full.  He sat down at his table and feeling jaunty after his
adventure ordered himself (at the expense of the British
Government) a bottle of champagne.  The baroness gave
him a flashing, brilliant smile.  She was a woman of
more than forty, but in a hard and glittering manner
extremely beautiful.  She was a high-coloured blonde
with golden hair of a metallic lustre, lovely no doubt
but not attractive, and Ashenden had from the first
reflected that it was not the sort of hair you would like
to find in your soup.  She had fine features, blue eyes, a
straight nose, and a pink and white skin, but her skin
was stretched over her bones a trifle tightly; she was
generously <i>décolletté</i> and her white and ample bosom had
the quality of marble.  There was nothing in her
appearance to suggest the yielding tenderness that the
susceptible find so alluring.  She was magnificently
gowned, but scantily bejewelled, so that Ashenden, who
knew something of these matters, concluded that the
superior authority had given her <i>carte blanche</i> at a
dressmaker's but had not thought it prudent or necessary to
provide her with rings or pearls.  She was notwithstanding
so showy that but for R.'s story of the minister,
Ashenden would have thought the sight of her alone
must have aroused in anyone on whom she desired to
exercise her wiles, the sense of prudence.
</p>

<p>
While he waited for his dinner to be served, Ashenden
cast his eyes over the company.  Most of the persons
gathered were old friends by sight.  At that time
Geneva was a hot-bed of intrigue and its home was the
hotel at which Ashenden was staying.  There were
Frenchmen there, Italians and Russians, Turks,
Rumanians, Greeks and Egyptians.  Some had fled their
country, some doubtless represented it.  There was a
Bulgarian, an agent of Ashenden's, whom for greater
safety he had never even spoken to in Geneva; he was
dining that night with two fellow-countrymen and in a
day or so, if he was not killed in the interval, might have
a very interesting communication to make.  Then there
was a little German prostitute, with china-blue eyes and
a doll-like face, who made frequent journeys along the
lake and up to Berne, and in the exercise of her
profession got little titbits of information over which
doubtless they pondered with deliberation in Berlin.
She was of course of a different class from the baroness
and hunted much easier game.  But Ashenden was
surprised to catch sight of Count von Holzminden and
wondered what on earth he was doing there.  This was
the German agent in Vevey and he came over to Geneva
only on occasion.  Once Ashenden had seen him in the
old quarter of the city, with its silent houses and
deserted streets, talking at a corner to a man whose
appearance very much suggested the spy and he would
have given a great deal to hear what they said to one
another.  It had amused him to come across the Count,
for in London before the war he had known him fairly
well.  He was of great family and indeed related to the
Hohenzollerns.  He was fond of England; he danced
well, rode well and shot well; people said he was more
English than the English.  He was a tall, thin fellow, in
well-cut clothes, with a close-cropped Prussian head, and
that peculiar bend of the body as though he were just
about to bow to a royalty that you feel, rather than see, in
those who have spent their lives about a court.  He had
charming manners and was much interested in the Fine
Arts.  But now Ashenden and he pretended they had
never seen one another before.  Each of course knew on
what work the other was engaged and Ashenden had
had a mind to chaff him about it&mdash;it seemed absurd when
he had dined with a man off and on for years and played
cards with him, to act as though he did not know him
from Adam&mdash;but refrained in case the German looked
upon his behaviour as further proof of the British
frivolity in face of war.  Ashenden was perplexed
Holzminden had never set foot in that hotel before and
it was unlikely that he had done so now without good
reason.
</p>

<p>
Ashenden asked himself whether this event had anything
to do with the unusual presence in the dining-room
of Prince Ali.  At that juncture it was imprudent
to ascribe any occurrence, however accidental it looked,
to the hazard of coincidence.  Prince Ali was an
Egyptian, a near relation of the Khedive, who had fled his
country when the Khedive was deposed.  He was a
bitter enemy of the English and was known to be
actively engaged in stirring up trouble in Egypt.  The
week before, the Khedive in great secrecy had passed
three days at the hotel and the pair of them had held
constant meetings in the Prince's apartments.  He was a
little fat man with a heavy black moustache.  He was
living with his two daughters and a certain Pasha,
Mustapha by name, who was his secretary and managed
his affairs.  The four of them were now dining together;
they drank a great deal of champagne, but sat in a stolid
silence.  The two princesses were emancipated young
women who spent their nights dancing in restaurants
with the bloods of Geneva.  They were short and stout,
with fine black eyes and heavy sallow faces; and they
were dressed with a rich loudness that suggested the
Fish-market at Cairo rather than the Rue de la Paix.  His
Highness usually ate upstairs but the princesses dined
every evening in the public dining-room: they were
chaperoned vaguely by a little old Englishwoman, a
Miss King, who had been their governess; but she sat at
a table by herself and they appeared to pay no attention
to her.  Once Ashenden, going along a corridor, had
come upon the elder of the two fat princesses berating
the governess in French with a violence that took his
breath away.  She was shouting at the top of her voice
and suddenly smacked the old woman's face.  When she
caught sight of Ashenden she gave him a furious look
and flinging into her room slammed the door.  He
walked on as though he had noticed nothing.
</p>

<p>
On his arrival Ashenden had tried to scrape acquaintance
with Miss King, but she had received his advances
not merely with frigidity but with churlishness.  He had
begun by taking off his hat when he met her, and she had
given him a stiff bow, then he had addressed her and she
had answered with such brevity that it was evident that
she wished to have nothing much to do with him.  But
it was not his business to be discouraged, so with what
assurance he could muster he took the first opportunity
to enter into conversation with her.  She drew herself
up and said in French, but with an English accent:
</p>

<p>
"I don't wish to make acquaintance with strangers."
</p>

<p>
She turned her back on him and next time he saw her,
cut him dead.
</p>

<p>
She was a tiny old woman, just a few little bones in a
bag of wrinkled skin, and her face was deeply furrowed.
It was obvious that she wore a wig, it was of a mousy
brown, very elaborate and not always set quite straight,
and she was heavily made up, with great patches of
scarlet on her withered cheeks and brilliantly red lips.
She dressed fantastically in gay clothes that looked as
though they had been bought higgledy-piggledy from
an old-clothes shop and in the daytime she wore
enormous, extravagantly girlish hats.  She tripped along
in very small smart shoes with very high heels.  Her
appearance was so grotesque that it created consternation
rather than amusement.  People turned in the street
and stared at her with open mouths.
</p>

<p>
Ashenden was told that Miss King had not been to
England since she was first engaged as governess of the
prince's mother and he could not but be amazed to think
of all she must have seen during those long years in the
harems of Cairo.  It was impossible to guess how old she
was.  How many of those short Eastern lives must have
run their course under her eyes and what dark secrets
must she have known!  Ashenden wondered where she
came from; an exile from her own country for so long,
she must possess in it neither family nor friends: he
knew that her sentiments were anti-English and if she
had answered him so rudely he surmised that she had
been told to be on her guard against him.  She never
spoke anything but French.  Ashenden wondered what
it was she thought of as she sat there, for luncheon and
dinner, by herself.  He wondered if she ever read.  After
meals she went straight upstairs and was never seen in
the public sitting-rooms.  He wondered what she
thought of those two emancipated princesses who wore
garish frocks and danced with strange men in second-rate
cafés.  But when Miss King passed him on her way
out of the dining-room it seemed to Ashenden that her
mask of a face scowled.  She appeared actively to dislike
him.  Her gaze met his and the pair of them looked at
one another for a moment; he imagined that she tried to
put into her stare an unspoken insult.  It would have
been pleasantly absurd in that painted, withered visage
if it had not been for some reason rather oddly pathetic.
</p>

<p>
But now the Baroness de Higgins, having finished her
dinner, gathered up her handkerchief and her bag, and
with waiters bowing on either side sailed down the
spacious room.  She stopped at Ashenden's table.  She
looked magnificent.
</p>

<p>
"I'm so glad you can play bridge to-night," she said
in her perfect English, with no more than a trace of
German accent.  "Will you come to my sitting-room
when you are ready and have your coffee?"
</p>

<p>
"What a lovely dress," said Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"It is frightful.  I have nothing to wear, I don't know
what I shall do now that I cannot go to Paris.  Those
horrible Prussians," and her r's grew guttural as she
raised her voice, "why did they want to drag my poor
country into this terrible war?"
</p>

<p>
She gave a sigh, and a flashing smile, and sailed on.
Ashenden was among the last to finish and when he left
the dining-room it was almost empty.  As he walked past
Count Holzminden, Ashenden feeling very gay hazarded
the shadow of a wink.  The German agent could not be
quite sure of it and if he suspected it might rack his
brains to discover what mystery it portended.  Ashenden
walked up to the second floor and knocked at the
baroness's door.
</p>

<p>
"<i>Entrez, entrez</i>," she said and flung it open.
</p>

<p>
She shook both his hands with cordiality and drew
him into the room.  He saw that the two persons who
were to make the four had already arrived.  They were
Prince Ali and his secretary.  Ashenden was astounded.
</p>

<p>
"Allow me to introduce Mr. Ashenden to your
Highness," said the baroness, speaking in her fluent
French.
</p>

<p>
Ashenden bowed and took the proffered hand.  The
Prince gave him a quick look, but did not speak.
Madame de Higgins went on:
</p>

<p>
"I do not know if you have met the Pasha."
</p>

<p>
"I am delighted to make your acquaintance, Mr. Ashenden,"
said the Prince's secretary, warmly shaking
his hand.  "Our beautiful baroness has talked to us of
your bridge and His Highness is devoted to the game.
<i>N'est-ce pas, Altesse</i>?"
</p>

<p>
"<i>Oui, oui</i>," said the Prince.
</p>

<p>
Mustapha Pasha was a huge fat fellow, of forty-five
perhaps, with large mobile eyes and a big black
moustache.  He wore a dinner-jacket with a large diamond in
his shirt-front and the <i>tarboosh</i> of his country.  He was
exceedingly voluble, and the words tumbled out of his
mouth tumultuously, like marbles out of a bag.  He took
pains to be extremely civil to Ashenden.  The Prince sat
in silence, looking at Ashenden quietly from under his
heavy eyelids.  He seemed shy.
</p>

<p>
"I have not seen you at the club, <i>Monsieur</i>," said the
Pasha.  "Do you not like baccarat?"
</p>

<p>
"I play but seldom."
</p>

<p>
"The baroness, who has read everything, tells me that
you are a remarkable writer.  Unfortunately I do not
read English."
</p>

<p>
The baroness paid Ashenden some very fulsome
compliments, to which he listened with a proper and
grateful politeness, and then, having provided her guests
with coffee and liqueurs, she produced the cards.
Ashenden could not but wonder why he had been asked
to play.  He had (he flattered himself) few illusions about
himself, and so far as bridge was concerned none.  He
knew that he was a good player of the second class, but
he had played often enough with the best players in the
world to know that he was not in the same street with
them.  The game played now was contract, with which
he was not very familiar, and the stakes were high; but
the game was obviously but a pretext and Ashenden had
no notion what other game was being played under the
rose.  It might be that knowing he was a British agent
the Prince and his secretary had desired to see him in
order to find out what sort of person he was.  Ashenden
had felt for a day or two that something was in the air
and this meeting confirmed his suspicions, but he had
not the faintest notion of what nature this something
was.  His spies had told him of late nothing that
signified.  He was now persuaded that he owed that
visit of the Swiss police to the kindly intervention of the
baroness and it looked as though the bridge-party had
been arranged when it was discovered that the detectives
had been able to do nothing.  The notion was
mysterious, but diverting, and as Ashenden played one
rubber after another, joining in the incessant
conversation, he watched what was said by himself no less
closely than what was said by the others.  The war was
spoken of a good deal and the baroness and the Pasha
expressed very anti-German sentiments.  The baroness's
heart was in England whence her family (the stable-boy
from Yorkshire) had sprung and the Pasha looked upon
Paris as his spiritual home.  When the Pasha talked of
Montmartre and its life by night the Prince was roused
from his silence.
</p>

<p>
"<i>C'est une bien belle ville, Paris</i>," he said.
</p>

<p>
"The Prince has a beautiful apartment there," said his
secretary, "with beautiful pictures and life-sized statues."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden explained that he had the greatest sympathy
for the national aspirations of Egypt and that he looked
upon Vienna as the most pleasing capital in Europe.  He
was as friendly to them as they were to him.  But if they
were under the impression that they would get any
information out of him that they had not already seen in
the Swiss papers he had a notion that they were
mistaken.  At one moment he had a suspicion that he was
being sounded upon the possibility of selling himself.
It was done so discreetly that he could not be quite sure,
but he had a feeling that a suggestion floated in the air
that a clever writer could do his country a good turn and
make a vast amount of money for himself if he cared to
enter into an arrangement that would bring to a
troubled world the peace that every humane man must
so sincerely desire.  It was plain that nothing very much
would be said that first evening, but Ashenden as
evasively as he could, more by general amiability than by
words, tried to indicate that he was willing to hear more
of the subject.  While he talked with the Pasha and the
beautiful Austrian he was conscious that the watchful
eyes of Prince Ali were upon him, and he had an uneasy
suspicion that they read too much of his thoughts.  He
felt rather than knew that the Prince was an able and
astute man.  It was possible that after he left them the
Prince would tell the other two that they were wasting their
time and there was nothing to be done with Ashenden.
Soon after midnight, a rubber having been finished,
the Prince rose from the table.
</p>

<p>
"It is getting late," he said, "and Mr. Ashenden has
doubtless much to do to-morrow.  We must not keep
him up."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden looked upon this as a signal to take himself
off.  He left the three together to discuss the situation and
retired not a little mystified.  He could only trust that
they were no less puzzled than he.  When he got to his
room he suddenly realised that he was dog-tired.  He
could hardly keep his eyes open while he undressed, and
the moment he flung himself into bed he fell asleep.
</p>

<p>
He would have sworn that he had not been asleep five
minutes when he was dragged back to wakefulness by a
knocking at the door.  He listened for a moment.
</p>

<p>
"Who is it?"
</p>

<p>
"It's the maid.  Open.  I have something to say to you."
</p>

<p>
Cursing, Ashenden turned on his light, ran a hand
through his thinning and rumpled hair (for like Julius
Cæsar he disliked exposing an unbecoming baldness)
and unlocked and opened the door.  Outside it stood a
tousled Swiss maid.  She wore no apron and looked as
though she had thrown on her clothes in a hurry.
</p>

<p>
"The old English lady, the governess of the Egyptian
princesses, is dying and she wants to see you."
</p>

<p>
"Me?" said Ashenden.  "It's impossible.  I don't know
her.  She was all right this evening."
</p>

<p>
He was confused and spoke his thoughts as they came
to him.
</p>

<p>
"She asks for you.  The doctor says, will you come?
She cannot last much longer."
</p>

<p>
"It must be a mistake.  She can't want me."
</p>

<p>
"She said your name and the number of your room.
She says: quick, quick."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden shrugged his shoulders.  He went back into
his room to put on slippers and a dressing-gown, and
as an after-thought dropped a small revolver into his
pocket.  Ashenden believed much more in his acuteness
than in a firearm, which is apt to go off at the wrong
time and make a noise, but there are moments when it
gives you confidence to feel your fingers round its butt,
and this sudden summons seemed to him exceedingly
mysterious.  It was ridiculous to suppose that those two
cordial stout Egyptian gentlemen were laying some sort
of trap for him, but in the work upon which Ashenden
was engaged the dullness of routine was apt now
and again to slip quite shamelessly into the
melodrama of the 'sixties.  Just as passion will make use
brazenly of the hackneyed phrase, so will chance show
itself insensitive to the triteness of the literary
convention.
</p>

<p>
Miss King's room was two floors higher than
Ashenden's, and as he accompanied the chamber-maid
along the corridor and up the stairs he asked her what
was the matter with the old governess.  She was flurried
and stupid.
</p>

<p>
"I think she has had a stroke.  I don't know.  The
night-porter woke me and said Monsieur Bridet wanted
me to get up at once."
</p>

<p>
Monsieur Bridet was the assistant-manager.
</p>

<p>
"What is the time?" asked Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"It must be three o'clock."
</p>

<p>
They arrived at Miss King's door and the maid
knocked.  It was opened by Monsieur Bridet.  He had
evidently been roused from his sleep; he wore slippers
on his bare feet, grey trousers and a frock-coat over his
pyjamas.  He looked absurd.  His hair as a rule plastered
neatly on his head stood on end.  He was extremely
apologetic.
</p>

<p>
"A thousand excuses for disturbing you, Monsieur
Ashenden, but she kept asking for you and the doctor
said you should be sent for."
</p>

<p>
"It doesn't matter at all."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden walked in.  It was a small back room and all
the lights were on.  The windows were closed and the
curtains drawn.  It was intensely hot.  The doctor, a
bearded, grizzled Swiss, was standing at the bedside.
Monsieur Bridet, notwithstanding his costume and his
evident harassment, found in himself the presence of
mind to remain the attentive manager, and with
ceremony effected the proper introduction.
</p>

<p>
"This is Mr. Ashenden, for whom Miss King has been
asking Dr. Arbos of the Faculty of Medicine of Geneva."
</p>

<p>
Without a word the doctor pointed to the bed.  On it
lay Miss King.  It gave Ashenden a shock to look at her.
She wore a large white cotton night-cap (on entering
Ashenden had noticed the brown wig on a stand on the
dressing-table) tied under the chin and a white, voluminous
nightdress that came high up in the neck.  Nightcap
and nightdress belonged to a past age and reminded you
of Cruikshank's illustrations to the novels of Charles
Dickens.  Her face was greasy still with the cream she
had used before going to bed to remove her make-up,
but she had removed it summarily and there were
streaks of black on her eyebrows and of red on her
cheeks.  She looked very small, lying in the bed, no
larger than a child, and immensely old.
</p>

<p>
"She must be well over eighty," thought Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
She did not look human, but like a doll, the caricature
of an old, old witch that an ironic toymaker had
amused himself with modelling.  She lay perfectly still
on her back, the tiny little body hardly marked under
the flatness of the blanket, her face even smaller than
usual because she had removed her teeth; and you
would have thought she was dead but for the black eyes,
strangely large in the shrunken mask, that stared
unblinkingly.  Ashenden thought their expression changed
when she saw him.
</p>

<p>
"Well, Miss King, I'm sorry to see you like this," he
said with forced cheerfulness.
</p>

<p>
"She cannot speak," said the doctor.  "She had
another little stroke when the maid went to fetch you.  I
have just given her an injection.  She may partly recover
the use of her tongue in a little while.  She has
something to say to you."
</p>

<p>
"I will gladly wait," said Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
He fancied that in those dark eyes he saw a look of
relief.  For a moment or two the four of them stood
round the bed and stared at the dying woman.
</p>

<p>
"Well, if there is nothing I can do, I may just as well
go back to bed," said Monsieur Bridet then.
</p>

<p>
"<i>Allez, mon ami</i>," said the doctor.  "You can do
nothing."
</p>

<p>
Monsieur Bridet turned to Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"May I have a word with you?" he asked.
</p>

<p>
"Certainly."
</p>

<p>
The doctor noticed a sudden fear in Miss King's eyes.
</p>

<p>
"Do not be alarmed," he said kindly.  "Monsieur
Ashenden is not going.  He will stay as long as you
wish."
</p>

<p>
The assistant-manager took Ashenden to the door
and partly closed it so that those within should not hear
his undertones.
</p>

<p>
"I can count on your discretion, Monsieur Ashenden,
can I not?  It is a very disagreeable thing to have anyone
die in a hotel.  The other guests do not like it and we
must do all we can to prevent their knowing.  I shall
have the body removed the first possible moment and I
shall be extremely obliged if you will not say that there
has been a death."
</p>

<p>
"You can have every confidence in me," said Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"It is very unfortunate that the manager should be
away for the night.  I am afraid he will be exceedingly
displeased.  Of course if it had been possible I would
have sent for an ambulance and had her taken to the
hospital, but the doctor said she might die before we got
her downstairs and absolutely refused to let me.  It is not
my fault if she dies in the hotel."
</p>

<p>
"Death so often chooses its moments without
consideration."  murmured Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"After all she is an old woman, she should have died
years ago.  What did this Egyptian prince want to have
a governess of that age for?  He ought to have sent her
back to her own country.  These Orientals, they are
always giving trouble."
</p>

<p>
"Where is the Prince now?" asked Ashenden.  "She
has been in his service for many years.  Ought you not
to wake him?"
</p>

<p>
"He is not in the hotel.  He went out with his
secretary.  He may be playing baccarat.  I do not know.
Anyhow I cannot send all over Geneva to find him."
</p>

<p>
"And the princesses?"
</p>

<p>
"They have not come in.  They seldom return to the
hotel till dawn.  They are mad about dancing.  I do not
know where they are and in any case they would not
thank me for dragging them away from their diversions,
because their governess has had a stroke, I know what
they are.  The night-porter will tell them when they arrive
and then they can please themselves.  She does not want
them.  When the night-porter fetched me and I went into
her room I asked where his highness was and she cried
with all her strength: no, no."
</p>

<p>
"She could talk then?"
</p>

<p>
"Yes, after a fashion, but the thing that surprised me
was that she spoke in English.  She always insisted on
talking French.  You know, she hated the English."
</p>

<p>
"What did she want with me?"
</p>

<p>
"That I cannot tell you.  She said she had something
that she must say to you at once.  It is funny, she knew
the number of your room.  At first when she asked for
you I would not let them send.  I cannot have my clients
disturbed in the middle of the night because a crazy old
woman asks for them.  You have the right to your sleep,
I imagine.  But when the doctor came he insisted.  She
gave us no peace and when I said she must wait till
morning she cried."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden looked at the assistant-manager.  He
seemed to find nothing at all touching in the scene he
related.
</p>

<p>
"The doctor asked who you were and when I told
him he said that perhaps she wished to see you because
you were a compatriot."
</p>

<p>
"Perhaps," said Ashenden dryly.
</p>

<p>
"Well, I shall try to get a little sleep.  I shall give the
night-porter orders to wake me when everything is
over.  Fortunately the nights are long now and if
everything goes well we may be able to get the body away
before it is light."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden went back into the room and immediately
the dark eyes of the dying woman fixed upon him.  He
felt that it was incumbent upon him to say something,
but as he spoke he reflected on the foolish way in which
one speaks to the sick.
</p>

<p>
"I'm afraid you're feeling very ill, Miss King."
</p>

<p>
It seemed to him that a flash of anger crossed her eyes
and Ashenden could not but imagine that she was
exasperated by his futile words.
</p>

<p>
"You do not mind waiting?" asked the doctor.
</p>

<p>
"Of course not."
</p>

<p>
It appeared that the night-porter had been roused by
the ringing of the telephone from Miss King's room,
but on listening could get no one to speak.  The bell
continued to ring, so he went upstairs and knocked at
the door.  He entered with his pass-key and found Miss
King lying on the floor.  The telephone had fallen too.
It looked as though, feeling ill, she had taken off the
receiver to call for help and then collapsed.  The
night-porter hurried to fetch the assistant-manager and
together they had lifted her back into bed.  Then the
maid was wakened and the doctor sent for.  It gave
Ashenden a queer feeling to listen to the doctor giving
him these facts in Miss King's hearing.  He spoke as
though she could not understand his French.  He spoke
as though she were already dead.
</p>

<p>
Then the doctor said:
</p>

<p>
"Well, there is really nothing more that I can do.  It is
useless for me to stay.  I can be rung up if there is any
change."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden, knowing that Miss King might remain in
that condition for hours, shrugged his shoulders.
</p>

<p>
"Very well."
</p>

<p>
The doctor patted her raddled cheek as though she
were a child.
</p>

<p>
"You must try to sleep.  I will come back in the
morning."
</p>

<p>
He packed up the dispatch-case in which he had his
medical appliances, washed his hands and shuffled
himself into a heavy coat.  Ashenden accompanied him to
the door and as he shook hands the doctor gave his
prognosis in a pout of his bearded mouth.  Ashenden,
coming back, looked at the maid.  She sat on the edge of
a chair, uneasily, as though in the presence of death she
feared to presume.  Her broad, ugly face was bloated
with fatigue.
</p>

<p>
"There's no use in your staying up," Ashenden said
to her.  "Why don't you go to bed?"
</p>

<p>
"<i>Monsieur</i> wouldn't like to remain here alone.
Somebody must stay with him."
</p>

<p>
"But good heavens, why?  You have your day's work
to do to-morrow."
</p>

<p>
"In any case I have to get up at five."
</p>

<p>
"Then try to get a little sleep now.  You can give me
a look in when you get up.  <i>Allez</i>."
</p>

<p>
She rose heavily to her feet.
</p>

<p>
"As the gentleman wishes.  But I will stay very
willingly."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden smiled and shook his head.
</p>

<p>
"<i>Bonsoir, ma pauvre mademoiselle</i>," said the maid.
</p>

<p>
She went out and Ashenden was left alone.  He sat by
the bedside and again his eyes met Miss King's.  It was
embarrassing to encounter that unshrinking stare.
</p>

<p>
"Don't worry yourself, Miss King.  You've had a
slight stroke.  I'm sure your speech will come back to
you in a minute."
</p>

<p>
He felt certain then that he saw in those dark eyes a
desperate effort to speak.  He could not be mistaken.
The mind was shaken by desire, but the paralysed body
was incapable of obedience.  For her disappointment
expressed itself quite plainly, tears came to her eyes and
ran down her cheeks.  Ashenden took out his
handkerchief and dried them.
</p>

<p>
"Don't distress yourself, Miss King.  Have a little
patience and I'm sure you'll be able to say anything you
want."
</p>

<p>
He did not know if it was his fancy that he read in her
eyes now the despairing thought that she had not the
time to wait.  Perhaps it was only that he ascribed to her
the notions that came to himself.  On the dressing-table
were the governess's poor little toilet things, silver-backed
embossed brushes and a silver mirror; in a corner
stood a shabby black trunk and on the top of the wardrobe
a large hat-box in shiny leather.  It all looked poor
and mean in that trim hotel room, with its suite in highly
varnished rose-wood.  The glare was intolerable.
</p>

<p>
"Wouldn't you be more comfortable if I turned out
some of the lights?" asked Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
He put out all the lamps but the one by the bedside
and then sat down again.  He had a longing to smoke.
Once more his eyes were held by those other eyes in
which was all that remained alive of that old, old
woman.  He felt certain that she had something that she
wanted urgently to say to him.  But what was it?  What
was it?  Perhaps she had asked him only because, feeling
death near, she had had a sudden yearning, she the exile
of so many years, to die with someone of her own
people, so long forgotten, by her side.  That was what
the doctor thought.  But why should she have sent for
him?  There were other English people in the hotel.  There
was an old pair, a retired Indian Civilian and his wife, to
whom it seemed more natural that she should turn.  No
one could be more of a stranger to her than Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"Have you got something to say to me, Miss King?"
</p>

<p>
He tried to read an answer in her eyes.  They continued
to stare at him meaningly, but what the meaning
was he had no notion.
</p>

<p>
"Don't be afraid I shall go.  I will stay as long as you
want me."
</p>

<p>
Nothing, nothing.  The black eyes, and as he looked
at them they seemed to glow mysteriously as though
there were fire behind them, the eyes continued to hold
him with that insistent stare.  Then Ashenden asked
himself if she had sent for him because she knew that he
was a British agent.  Was it possible that at that last
moment she had had some unexpected revulsion of
feeling from everything that had signified to her for so
many years?  Perhaps at the moment of death a love for
her country, a love that had been dead for half a century,
awakened again in her&mdash;("I'm silly to fancy these
idiotic things," thought Ashenden, "it's cheap and
tawdry fiction")&mdash;and she had been seized with a desire
to do something for what was after all her own.  No one
was quite himself just then and patriotism (in peace-time
an attitude best left to politicians, publicists and fools,
but in the dark days of war an emotion that can wring
the heart-strings), patriotism made one do odd things.
It was curious that she had been unwilling to see the
Prince and his daughters.  Did she on a sudden hate
them?  Did she feel herself a traitor on their account and
now at the last hour wish to make amends?  ("It's all
very improbable, she's just a silly old maid who ought to
have died years ago.")  But you couldn't ignore the
improbable.  Ashenden, his common sense protesting,
became strangely convinced that she had some secret
that she wished to impart to him.  She had sent for him
knowing who he was because he could make use of it.
She was dying and feared nothing.  But was it really
important?  Ashenden leaned forward trying more
eagerly to read what her eyes had to say.  Perhaps it was
only some trivial thing that was important only in her
addled old brain.  Ashenden was sick of the people who saw
spies in every inoffensive passer-by and plots in the most
innocent combination of circumstances.  It was a hundred
to one that if Miss King recovered her speech she would
tell him something that could be of no use to anybody.
</p>

<p>
But what must that old woman know!  With her sharp
eyes and sharp ears she must have had the chance to
discover matters that were closely hidden from persons
that seemed less insignificant.  Ashenden thought again
how he had had the impression that something of real
consequence was being prepared round about him.  It
was curious that Holzminden should have come to the
hotel that day; and why had Prince Ali and the Pasha,
those wild gamblers, wasted an evening in playing
contract-bridge with him?  It might be that some new
plan was in question, it might be that the very greatest
affairs were afoot, and perhaps what the old woman had
to say might make all the difference in the world.  It
might mean defeat or victory.  It might mean anything.
And there she lay powerless to speak.  For a long time
Ashenden stared at her in silence.
</p>

<p>
"Has it got anything to do with the war, Miss King?"
he said on a sudden, loudly.
</p>

<p>
Something passed through her eyes and a tremor shot
across her little old face.  It was a distinct movement.
Something strange and horrible was happening and
Ashenden held his breath.  The tiny frail body was
suddenly convulsed and that old woman, as though by a
final desperate effort of will, raised herself up in the bed.
Ashenden sprang forward to support her.
</p>

<p>
"England," she said, just that one word, in a harsh
cracked voice, and fell back in his arms.
</p>

<p>
When he laid her down on the pillow, he saw that she
was dead.
</p>

<p><br /><br /><br /></p>

<p><a id="chap04"></a></p>

<h3>
IV
<br /><br />
<i>The Hairless Mexican</i>
</h3>

<p>
"Do you like macaroni?" said R.
</p>

<p>
"What do you mean by macaroni?"
answered Ashenden.  "It is like asking me if I
like poetry.  I like Keats and Wordsworth and
Verlaine and Goethe.  When you say macaroni, do you
mean <i>spaghetti, tagliatelli, rigatoni, vermicelli, fettucini,
tufali, farfalli</i>, or just macaroni?"
</p>

<p>
"Macaroni," replied R., a man of few words.
</p>

<p>
"I like all simple things, boiled eggs, oysters and
caviare, <i>truite au bleu</i>, grilled salmon, roast lamb (the
saddle by preference), cold grouse, treacle tart and rice
pudding.  But of all simple things the only one I can eat
day in and day out, not only without disgust but with
the eagerness of an appetite unimpaired by excess, is
macaroni."
</p>

<p>
"I am glad of that because I want you to go down to
Italy."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden had come from Geneva to meet R. at
Lyons and having got there before him had spent the
afternoon wandering about the dull, busy and prosaic
streets of that thriving city.  They were sitting now in
a restaurant on the <i>place</i> to which Ashenden had taken
R. on his arrival because it was reputed to give you
the best food in that part of France.  But since in so
crowded a resort (for the Lyonese like a good dinner)
you never knew what inquisitive ears were pricked up
to catch any useful piece of information that might fall
from your lips, they had contented themselves with
talking of indifferent things.  They had reached the end
of an admirable repast.
</p>

<p>
"Have another glass of brandy?" said R.
</p>

<p>
"No, thank you," answered Ashenden, who was of an
abstemious turn.
</p>

<p>
"One should do what one can to mitigate the rigours
of war," remarked R. as he took the bottle and poured
out a glass for himself and another for Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
Ashenden, thinking it would be affectation to protest,
let the gesture pass, but felt bound to remonstrate with
his chief on the unseemly manner in which he held the
bottle.
</p>

<p>
"In my youth I was always taught that you should
take a woman by the waist and a bottle by the neck," he
murmured.
</p>

<p>
"I am glad you told me.  I shall continue to hold a
bottle by the waist and give women a wide berth."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden did not know what to reply to this and so
remained silent.  He sipped his brandy and R. called for
his bill.  It was true that he was an important person,
with power to make or mar quite a large number of his
fellows, and his opinions were listened to by those who
held in their hands the fate of empires; but he could
never face the business of tipping a waiter without an
embarrassment that was obvious in his demeanour.  He
was tortured by the fear of making a fool of himself by
giving too much or of exciting the waiter's icy scorn by
giving too little.  When the bill came he passed some
hundred-franc notes over to Ashenden and said:
</p>

<p>
"Pay him, will you?  I can never understand French
figures."
</p>

<p>
The groom brought them their hats and coats.
</p>

<p>
"Would you like to go back to the hotel?" asked
Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"We might as well."
</p>

<p>
It was early in the year, but the weather had suddenly
turned warm, and they walked with their coats over
their arms.  Ashenden knowing that R. liked a
sitting-room had engaged one for him and to this, when they
reached the hotel, they went.  The hotel was
old-fashioned and the sitting-room was vast.  It was
furnished with a heavy mahogany suite upholstered in
green velvet and the chairs were set primly round a large
table.  On the walls, covered with a dingy paper, were
large steel engravings of the battles of Napoleon, and
from the ceiling hung an enormous chandelier once
used for gas, but now fitted with electric bulbs.  It
flooded the cheerless room with a cold, hard light.
</p>

<p>
"This is very nice," said R., as they went in.
</p>

<p>
"Not exactly cosy," suggested Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"No, but it looks as though it were the best room in
the place.  It all looks very <i>good</i> to me."
</p>

<p>
He drew one of the green velvet chairs away from the
table and, sitting down, lit a cigar.  He loosened his belt
and unbuttoned his tunic.
</p>

<p>
"I always thought I liked a cheroot better than
anything," he said, "but since the war I've taken quite a
fancy to Havanas.  Oh, well, I suppose it can't last for
ever."  The corners of his mouth flickered with the
beginning of a smile.  "It's an ill wind that blows
nobody any good."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden took two chairs, one to sit on and one for
his feet, and when R. saw him he said: "That's not a bad
idea," and swinging another chair out from the table
with a sigh of relief put his boots on it.
</p>

<p>
"What room is that next door?" he asked.
</p>

<p>
"That's your bedroom."
</p>

<p>
"And on the other side?"
</p>

<p>
"A banqueting hall."
</p>

<p>
R. got up and strolled slowly about the room and
when he passed the windows, as though in idle curiosity,
peeped through the heavy rep curtains that covered
them, and then returning to his chair once more
comfortably put his feet up.
</p>

<p>
"It's just as well not to take any more risk than one
need," he said.
</p>

<p>
He looked at Ashenden reflectively.  There was a
slight smile on his thin lips, but the pale eyes too closely
set together, remained cold and steely.  R.'s stare would
have been embarrassing if Ashenden had not been used
to it.  He knew that R. was considering how he would
broach the subject that he had in mind.  The silence
must have lasted for two or three minutes.
</p>

<p>
"I'm expecting a fellow to come and see me to-night,"
he said at last.  "His train gets in about ten."  He
gave his wrist-watch a glance.  "He's known as the
Hairless Mexican."
</p>

<p>
"Why?"
</p>

<p>
"Because he's hairless and because he's a Mexican."
</p>

<p>
"The explanation seems perfectly satisfactory," said
Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"He'll tell you all about himself.  He talks nineteen to
the dozen.  He was on his uppers when I came across
him.  It appears that he was mixed up in some revolution
in Mexico and had to get out with nothing but the
clothes he stood up in.  They were rather the worse for
wear when I found him.  If you want to please him you
call him General.  He claims to have been a general in
Huerta's army, at least I think it was Huerta; anyhow he
says that if things had gone right he would be minister
of war now and no end of a big bug.  I've found him
very useful.  Not a bad chap.  The only thing I really
have against him is that he will use scent."
</p>

<p>
"And where do I come in?" asked Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"He's going down to Italy.  I've got rather a ticklish
job for him to do and I want you to stand by.  I'm not
keen on trusting him with a lot of money.  He's a
gambler and he's a bit too fond of the girls.  I suppose
you came from Geneva on your Ashenden passport."
</p>

<p>
"Yes."
</p>

<p>
"I've got another for you, a diplomatic one, by the
way, in the name of Somerville with visas for France and
Italy.  I think you and he had better travel together.
He's an amusing cove when he gets going, and I think
you ought to get to know one another."
</p>

<p>
"What is the job?"
</p>

<p>
"I haven't yet quite made up my mind how much it's
desirable for you to know about it."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden did not reply.  They eyed one another in a
detached manner, as though they were strangers who
sat together in a railway carriage and each wondered
who and what the other was.
</p>

<p>
"In your place I'd leave the General to do most of
the talking.  I wouldn't tell him more about yourself
than you find absolutely necessary.  He won't ask you
any questions, I can promise you that, I think he's by
way of being a gentleman after his own fashion."
</p>

<p>
"By the way, what is his real name?"
</p>

<p>
"I always call him Manuel, I don't know that he likes
it very much, his name is Manuel Carmona."
</p>

<p>
"I gather by what you have not said that he's an
unmitigated scoundrel."
</p>

<p>
R. smiled with his pale blue eyes.
</p>

<p>
"I don't know that I'd go quite so far as that.  He
hasn't had the advantages of a public-school education.
His ideas of playing the game are not quite the same
as yours or mine.  I don't know that I'd leave a gold
cigarette-case about when he was in the neighbourhood,
but if he lost money to you at poker and had pinched
your cigarette-case he would immediately pawn it to
pay you.  If he had half a chance he'd seduce your wife,
but if you were up against it he'd share his last crust
with you.  The tears will run down his face when he
hears Gounod's 'Ave Maria' on the gramophone, but
if you insult his dignity he'll shoot you like a dog.  It
appears that in Mexico it's an insult to get between a
man and his drink and he told me himself that once when
a Dutchman who didn't know passed between him and
the bar he whipped out his revolver and shot him dead."
</p>

<p>
"Did nothing happen to him?"
</p>

<p>
"No, it appears that he belongs to one of the best
families.  The matter was hushed up and it was
announced in the papers that the Dutchman had committed
suicide.  He did practically.  I don't believe
the Hairless Mexican has a great respect for human life."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden who had been looking intently at R. started
a little and he watched more carefully than
ever his chief's tired, lined and yellow face.  He knew
that he did not make this remark for nothing.
</p>

<p>
"Of course a lot of nonsense is talked about the value
of human life.  You might just as well say that the
counters you use at poker have an intrinsic value, their
value is what you like to make it; for a general giving
battle, men are merely counters and he's a fool if he
allows himself for sentimental reasons to look upon
them as human beings."
</p>

<p>
"But, you see, they're counters that feel and think
and if they believe they're being squandered they are
quite capable of refusing to be used any more."
</p>

<p>
"Anyhow, that's neither here nor there.  We've had
information that a man called Constantine Andreadi is
on his way from Constantinople with certain documents
that we want to get hold of.  He's a Greek.  He's an
agent of Enver Pasha and Enver has great confidence
in him.  He's given him verbal messages that are too
secret and too important to be put on paper.  He's sailing
from the Piræus, on a boat called the <i>Ithaca</i>, and will
land at Brindisi on his way to Rome.  He's to deliver
his dispatches at the German embassy and impart what
he has to say personally to the ambassador."
</p>

<p>
"I see."
</p>

<p>
At this time Italy was still neutral; the Central Powers
were straining every nerve to keep her so; the Allies
were doing what they could to induce her to declare
war on their side.
</p>

<p>
"We don't want to get into any trouble with the
Italian authorities, it might be fatal, but we've got to
prevent Andreadi from getting to Rome."
</p>

<p>
"At any cost?" asked Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"Money's no object," answered R., his lips twisting
into a sardonic smile.
</p>

<p>
"What do you propose to do?"
</p>

<p>
"I don't think you need bother your head about that."
</p>

<p>
"I have a fertile imagination," said Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"I want you to go down to Naples with the Hairless
Mexican.  He's very keen on getting back to Cuba.  It
appears that his friends are organising a show and he
wants to be as near at hand as possible so that he can
hop over to Mexico when things are ripe.  He needs
cash.  I've brought money down with me, in American
dollars, and I shall give it to you to-night.  You'd better
carry it on your person."
</p>

<p>
"Is it much?"
</p>

<p>
"It's a good deal, but I thought it would be easier
for you if it wasn't bulky, so I've got it in thousand-dollar
notes.  You will give the Hairless Mexican the
notes in return for the documents that Andreadi is
bringing."
</p>

<p>
A question sprang to Ashenden's lips, but he did not
ask it.  He asked another instead.
</p>

<p>
"Does this fellow understand what he has to do?"
</p>

<p>
"Perfectly."
</p>

<p>
There was a knock at the door.  It opened and the
Hairless Mexican stood before them.
</p>

<p>
"I have arrived.  Good evening, Colonel.  I am
enchanted to see you."
</p>

<p>
R. got up.
</p>

<p>
"Had a nice journey, Manuel?  This is Mr. Somerville,
who's going to Naples with you, General
Carmona."
</p>

<p>
"Pleased to meet you, sir."
</p>

<p>
He shook Ashenden's hand with such force that he
winced.
</p>

<p>
"Your hands are like iron, General," he murmured.
</p>

<p>
The Mexican gave them a glance.
</p>

<p>
"I had them manicured this morning.  I do not think
they were very well done.  I like my nails much more
highly polished."
</p>

<p>
They were cut to a point, stained bright red, and to
Ashenden's mind shone like mirrors.  Though it was
not cold the General wore a fur coat with an astrakhan
collar and with his every movement a wave of perfume
was wafted to your nose.
</p>

<p>
"Take off your coat, General, and have a cigar,"
said R.
</p>

<p>
The Hairless Mexican was a tall man, and though
thinnish gave you the impression of being very powerful;
he was smartly dressed in a blue serge suit, with a
silk handkerchief neatly tucked in the breast pocket of
his coat, and he wore a gold bracelet on his wrist.  His
features were good, but a little larger than life-size, and
his eyes were brown and lustrous.  He was quite hairless.
His yellow skin had the smoothness of a woman's and
he had no eyebrows nor eyelashes; he wore a pale
brown wig, rather long, and the locks were arranged
in artistic disorder.  This and the unwrinkled sallow
face, combined with his dandified dress, gave him an
appearance that was at first glance a trifle horrifying.
He was repulsive and ridiculous, but you could not take
your eyes from him.  There was a sinister fascination in
his strangeness.
</p>

<p>
He sat down and hitched up his trousers so that they
should not bag at the knee.
</p>

<p>
"Well, Manuel, have you been breaking any hearts
to-day?" said R. with his sardonic joviality.
</p>

<p>
The General turned to Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"Our good friend, the Colonel, envies me my successes
with the fair sex.  I tell him he can have just as
many as I if he will only listen to me.  Confidence, that
is all you need.  If you never fear a rebuff you will never
have one."
</p>

<p>
"Nonsense, Manuel, one has to have your way with
the girls.  There's something about you that they can't
resist."
</p>

<p>
The Hairless Mexican laughed with a self-satisfaction
that he did not try to disguise.  He spoke English very
well, with a Spanish accent, but with an American
intonation.
</p>

<p>
"But since you ask me, Colonel, I don't mind
telling you that I got into conversation on the train
with a little woman who was coming to Lyons to see
her mother-in-law.  She was not very young and she
was thinner than I like a woman to be, but she was
possible, and she helped me to pass an agreeable
hour."
</p>

<p>
"Well, let's get to business," said R.
</p>

<p>
"I am at your service, Colonel."  He gave Ashenden
a glance.  "Is Mr. Somerville a military man?"
</p>

<p>
"No," said R., "he's an author."
</p>

<p>
"It takes all sorts to make a world, as you say.  I am
happy to make your acquaintance, Mr. Somerville.  I
can tell you many stories that will interest you; I am
sure that we shall get on well together.  You have a
sympathetic air.  I am very sensitive to that.  To tell
you the truth I am nothing but a bundle of nerves and
if I am with a person who is antipathetic to me I go
all to pieces."
</p>

<p>
"I hope we shall have a pleasant journey," said
Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"When does our friend arrive at Brindisi?" asked the
Mexican, turning to R.
</p>

<p>
"He sails from the Piræus in the <i>Ithaca</i> on the
fourteenth.  It's probably some old tub, but you'd better get
down to Brindisi in good time."
</p>

<p>
"I agree with you."
</p>

<p>
R. got up and with his hands in his pockets sat on the
edge of the table.  In his rather shabby uniform, his
tunic unbuttoned, he looked a slovenly creature beside
the neat and well-dressed Mexican.
</p>

<p>
"Mr. Somerville knows practically nothing of the
errand on which you are going and I do not desire you
to tell him anything.  I think you had much better keep
your own counsel.  He is instructed to give you the
funds you need for your work, but your actions are your
own affair.  If you need his advice of course you can
ask for it."
</p>

<p>
"I seldom ask other people's advice and never take it."
</p>

<p>
"And should you make a mess of things I trust you to
keep Mr. Somerville out of it.  He must on no account
be compromised."
</p>

<p>
"I am a man of honour, Colonel," answered the Hairless
Mexican with dignity, "and I would sooner let myself
be cut in a thousand pieces than betray my friends."
</p>

<p>
"That is what I have already told Mr. Somerville.  On
the other hand, if everything pans out O.K. Mr. Somerville
is instructed to give you the sum we agreed on in
return for the papers I spoke to you about.  In what
manner you get them is no business of his."
</p>

<p>
"That goes without saying.  There is only one thing
I wish to make quite plain; Mr. Somerville understands
of course that I have not accepted the mission with which
you have entrusted me on account of the money?"
</p>

<p>
"Quite," replied R. gravely, looking him straight in
the eyes.
</p>

<p>
"I am with the Allies body and soul, I cannot forgive
the Germans for outraging the neutrality of Belgium,
and if I accept the money that you have offered me it is
because I am first and foremost a patriot.  I can trust
Mr. Somerville implicitly, I suppose?"
</p>

<p>
R. nodded.  The Mexican turned to Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"An expedition is being arranged to free my unhappy
country from the tyrants that exploit and ruin it and
every penny that I receive will go on guns and cartridges.
For myself I have no need of money; I am a soldier and I
can live on a crust and a few olives.  There are only three
occupations that befit a gentleman, war, cards and
women; it costs nothing to sling a rifle over your
shoulder and take to the mountains&mdash;and that is real
warfare, not this manoeuvring of battalions and firing
of great guns&mdash;women love me for myself, and I
generally win at cards."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden found the flamboyance of this strange creature,
with his scented handkerchief and his gold bracelet,
very much to his taste.  This was far from being just the
man in the street (whose tyranny we rail at but in the
end submit to) and to the amateur of the baroque in
human nature he was a rarity to be considered with
delight.  He was a purple patch on two legs.
Notwithstanding his wig and his hairless big face, he had
undoubtedly an air; he was absurd, but he did not give
you the impression that he was a man to be trifled with.
His self-complacency was magnificent.
</p>

<p>
"Where is your kit, Manuel?" asked R.
</p>

<p>
It was possible that a frown for an instant darkened
the Mexican's brow at the abrupt question that seemed
a little contemptuously to brush to one side his eloquent
statement, but he gave no other sign of displeasure.
Ashenden suspected that he thought the Colonel a
barbarian insensitive to the finer emotions.
</p>

<p>
"I left it at the station."
</p>

<p>
"Mr. Somerville has a diplomatic passport so that he
can get it through with his own things at the frontier
without examination if you like."
</p>

<p>
"I have very little, a few suits and some linen, but
perhaps it would be as well if Mr. Somerville would
take charge of it.  I bought half a dozen suits of silk
pyjamas before I left Paris."
</p>

<p>
"And what about you?" asked R., turning to Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"I've only got one bag.  It's in my room."
</p>

<p>
"You'd better have it taken to the station while
there's someone about.  Your train goes at one ten."
</p>

<p>
"Oh?"
</p>

<p>
This was the first Ashenden had heard that they were
to start that night.
</p>

<p>
"I think you'd better get down to Naples as soon as
possible."
</p>

<p>
"Very well."
</p>

<p>
R. got up.
</p>

<p>
"I'm going to bed.  I don't know what you fellows
want to do."
</p>

<p>
"I shall take a walk about Lyons," said the Hairless
Mexican.  "I am interested in life.  Lend me a hundred
francs, Colonel, will you?  I have no change on me."
</p>

<p>
R. took out his pocket-book and gave the General
the note he asked for.  Then to Ashenden:
</p>

<p>
"What are you going to do?  Wait here?"
</p>

<p>
"No," said Ashenden, "I shall go to the station and
read."
</p>

<p>
"You'd both of you better have a whisky and soda
before you go, hadn't you?  What about it, Manuel?"
</p>

<p>
"It is very kind of you, but I never drink anything
but champagne and brandy."
</p>

<p>
"Mixed?" asked R. dryly.
</p>

<p>
"Not necessarily," returned the other with gravity.
</p>

<p>
R. ordered brandy and soda and when it came,
whereas he and Ashenden helped themselves to both,
the Hairless Mexican poured himself out three parts of
a tumbler of neat brandy and swallowed it in two noisy
gulps.  He rose to his feet and put on his coat with the
astrakhan collar, seized in one hand his bold black hat
and, with the gesture of a romantic actor giving up the
girl he loved to one more worthy of her, held out the
other to R.
</p>

<p>
"Well, Colonel, I will bid you good night and pleasant
dreams.  I do not expect that we shall meet again so
soon."
</p>

<p>
"Don't make a hash of things, Manuel, and if you
do keep your mouth shut."
</p>

<p>
"They tell me that in one of your colleges where the
sons of gentlemen are trained to become naval officers
it is written in letters of gold: there is no such word as
impossible in the British Navy.  I do not know the
meaning of the word failure."
</p>

<p>
"It has a good many synonyms," retorted R.
</p>

<p>
"I will meet you at the station, Mr. Somerville," said
the Hairless Mexican, and with a flourish left them.
</p>

<p>
R. looked at Ashenden with that little smile of his that
always made his face look so dangerously shrewd.
</p>

<p>
"Well, what d'you think of him?"
</p>

<p>
"You've got me beat," said Ashenden.  "Is he a
mountebank?  He seems as vain as a peacock.  And with
that frightful appearance can he really be the lady's man
he pretends?  What makes you think you can trust him?"
</p>

<p>
R. gave a low chuckle and he washed his thin, old
hands with imaginary soap.
</p>

<p>
"I thought you'd like him.  He's quite a character,
isn't he?  I think we can trust him."  R.'s eyes suddenly
grew opaque.  "I don't believe it would pay him to
double-cross us."  He paused for a moment.  "Anyhow,
we've got to risk it.  I'll give you the tickets and the
money and then you can take yourself off; I'm all in
and I want to go to bed."
</p>

<p>
Ten minutes later Ashenden set out for the station
with his bag on a porter's shoulder.
</p>

<p>
Having nearly two hours to wait he made himself
comfortable in the waiting-room.  The light was good
and he read a novel.  When the time drew near for the
arrival of the train from Paris that was to take them
direct to Rome and the Hairless Mexican did not appear
Ashenden, beginning to grow a trifle anxious, went out
on the platform to look for him.  Ashenden suffered from
that distressing malady known as train fever; an hour
before his train was due he began to have apprehensions
lest he should miss it; he was impatient with the porters
who would never bring his luggage down from his room
in time and he could not understand why the hotel bus
cut it so fine; a block in the street would drive him to
frenzy and the languid movements of the station porters
infuriate him.  The whole world seemed in a horrid plot
to delay him; people got in his way as he passed through
the barriers; others, a long string of them, were at the
ticket-office getting tickets for other trains than his and
they counted their change with exasperating care; his
luggage took an interminable time to register; and then
if he was travelling with friends they would go to buy
newspapers, or would take a walk along the platform,
and he was certain they would be left behind, they would
stop to talk to a casual stranger or suddenly be seized
with a desire to telephone and disappear at a run.  In fact
the universe conspired to make him miss every train he
wanted to take and he was not happy unless he was
settled in his corner, his things on the rack above him,
with a good half-hour to spare.  Sometimes by arriving
at the station too soon he had caught an earlier train than
the one he had meant to, but that was nerve-racking and
caused him all the anguish of very nearly missing it.
</p>

<p>
The Rome express was signalled and there was no sign
of the Hairless Mexican, it came in and he was not to be
seen.  Ashenden became more and more harassed.  He
walked quickly up and down the platform, looked in all
the waiting-rooms, went to the <i>consigne</i> where the luggage
was left; he could not find him.  There were no sleeping-cars,
but a number of people got out and he took two
seats in a first-class carriage.  He stood at the door,
looking up and down the platform and up at the clock;
it was useless to go if his travelling companion did not
turn up, and Ashenden made up his mind to take his
things out of the carriage as the porter cried en voiture:
but, by George! he would give the brute hell when he
found him.  There were three minutes more, then two
minutes, then one; at that late hour there were few
persons about and all who were travelling had taken their
seats.  Then he saw the Hairless Mexican, followed by
two porters with his luggage and accompanied by a man
in a bowler-hat, walk leisurely on to the platform.  He
caught sight of Ashenden and waved to him.
</p>

<p>
"Ah, my dear fellow, there you are.  I wondered what
had become of you."
</p>

<p>
"Good God, man, hurry up or we shall miss the train."
</p>

<p>
"I never miss a train.  Have you got good seats?  The
<i>chef de gare</i> has gone for the night; this is his assistant."
</p>

<p>
The man in the bowler-hat took it off when Ashenden
nodded to him.
</p>

<p>
"But this is an ordinary carriage.  I am afraid I could
not travel in that."  He turned to the stationmaster's
assistant with an affable smile.  "You must do better for
me than that, <i>mon cher</i>."
</p>

<p>
"<i>Certainement, mon général</i>, I will put you into a
<i>salon-lit</i>.  Of course."
</p>

<p>
The assistant stationmaster led them along the train
and put them in an empty compartment where there
were two beds.  The Mexican eyed it with satisfaction
and watched the porters arrange the luggage.
</p>

<p>
"That will do very well.  I am much obliged to you."  He
held out his hand to the man in the bowler-hat.  "I
shall not forget you and next time I see the Minister I
will tell him with what civility you have treated me."
</p>

<p>
"You are too good, General.  I shall be very grateful."
</p>

<p>
A whistle was blown and the train started.
</p>

<p>
"This is better than an ordinary first-class carriage, I
think, Mr. Somerville," said the Mexican.  "A good
traveller should learn how to make the best of things."
</p>

<p>
But Ashenden was still extremely cross.
</p>

<p>
"I don't know why the devil you wanted to cut it so
fine.  We should have looked a pair of damned fools if
we'd missed the train."
</p>

<p>
"My dear fellow, there was never the smallest chance
of that.  When I arrived I told the stationmaster that I
was General Carmona, Commander-in-Chief of the
Mexican Army, and that I had to stop off in Lyons for
a few hours to hold a conference with the British
Field-Marshal.  I asked him to hold the train for me if I was
delayed and suggested that my government might see
its way to conferring an order on him.  I have been to
Lyons before, I like the girls here; they have not the
<i>chic</i> of the Parisians, but they have something, there is
no denying that they have something.  Will you have
a mouthful of brandy before you go to sleep?"
</p>

<p>
"No, thank you," said Ashenden morosely.
</p>

<p>
"I always drink a glass before going to bed, it settles
the nerves."
</p>

<p>
He looked in his suit-case and without difficulty found
a bottle.  He put it to his lips and had a long drink, wiped
his mouth with the back of his hand and lit a cigarette.
Then he took off his boots and lay down.  Ashenden
dimmed the light.
</p>

<p>
"I have never yet made up my mind," said the
Hairless Mexican reflectively, "whether it is pleasanter to go
to sleep with the kisses of a beautiful woman on your
mouth or with a cigarette between your lips.  Have you
ever been to Mexico?  I will tell you about Mexico
to-morrow.  Good night."
</p>

<p>
Presently Ashenden heard from his steady breathing
that he was asleep and in a little while himself dozed off.
Presently he woke.  The Mexican, deep in slumber, lay
motionless; he had taken off his fur coat and was using
it as a blanket; he still wore his wig.  Suddenly there was
a jolt and the train with a noisy grinding of brakes
stopped; in the twinkling of an eye, before Ashenden
could realise that anything had happened, the Mexican
was on his feet with his hand to his hip.
</p>

<p>
"What is it?" he cried.
</p>

<p>
"Nothing.  Probably only a signal against us."
</p>

<p>
The Mexican sat down heavily on his bed.  Ashenden
turned on the light.
</p>

<p>
"You wake quickly for such a sound sleeper," he said.
</p>

<p>
"You have to in my profession."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden would have liked to ask him whether this
was murder, conspiracy or commanding armies, but was
not sure that it would be discreet.  The General opened
his bag and took our the bottle.
</p>

<p>
"Will you have a nip?" he asked.  "There is nothing
like it when you wake suddenly in the night."
</p>

<p>
When Ashenden refused he put the bottle once more
to his lips and poured a considerable quantity of liquor
down his throat.  He sighed and lit a cigarette.  Although
Ashenden had seen him now drink nearly a bottle of
brandy, and it was probable that he had had a good deal
more when he was going about the town, he was
certainly quite sober.  Neither in his manner nor in his
speech was there any indication that he had drunk
during the evening anything but lemonade.
</p>

<p>
The train started and soon Ashenden again fell asleep.
When he awoke it was morning and turning round
lazily he saw that the Mexican was awake too.  He was
smoking a cigarette.  The floor by his side was strewn
with burnt-out butts and the air was thick and grey.
He had begged Ashenden not to insist on opening a
window, for he said the night air was dangerous.
</p>

<p>
"I did not get up, because I was afraid of waking you.
Will you do your toilet first or shall I?"
</p>

<p>
"I'm in no hurry," said Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"I am an old campaigner, it will not take me long.
Do you wash your teeth every day?"
</p>

<p>
"Yes," said Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"So do I.  It is a habit I learned in New York.  I
always think that a fine set of teeth are an adornment
to a man."
</p>

<p>
There was a wash-basin in the compartment and the
General scrubbed his teeth, with gurglings and garglings,
energetically.  Then he got a bottle of eau-de-Cologne
from his bag, poured some of it on a towel and rubbed
it over his face and hands.  He took a comb and carefully
arranged his wig; either it had not moved in the night
or else he had set it straight before Ashenden awoke.
He got another bottle out of his bag, with a spray
attached to it, and squeezing a bulb covered his shirt
and coat with a fine cloud of scent, did the same to his
handkerchief, and then with a beaming face, like a man
who has done his duty by the world and is well pleased,
turned to Ashenden and said:
</p>

<p>
"Now I am ready to brave the day.  I will leave my
things for you, you need not be afraid of the
eau-de-Cologne, it is the best you can get in Paris."
</p>

<p>
"Thank you very much," said Ashenden.  "All I want
is soap and water."
</p>

<p>
"Water?  I never use water except when I have a bath.
Nothing can be worse for the skin."
</p>

<p>
When they approached the frontier, Ashenden,
remembering the General's instructive gesture when he
was suddenly awakened in the night, said to him:
</p>

<p>
"If you've got a revolver on you I think you'd better
give it to me.  With my diplomatic passport they're not
likely to search me, but they might take it into their
heads to go through you and we don't want to have any
bothers."
</p>

<p>
"It is hardly a weapon, it is only a toy," returned the
Mexican, taking out of his hip-pocket a fully loaded
revolver of formidable dimensions.  "I do not like
parting with it even for an hour, it gives me the feeling
that I am not fully dressed.  But you are quite right, we
do not want to take any risks; I will give you my knife as
well.  I would always rather use a knife than a revolver;
I think it is a more elegant weapon."
</p>

<p>
"I daresay it is only a matter of habit," answered
Ashenden.  "Perhaps you are more at home with a knife."
</p>

<p>
"Anyone can pull a trigger, but it needs a man to
use a knife."
</p>

<p>
To Ashenden it looked as though it were in a
single movement that he tore open his waistcoat and
from his belt snatched and opened a long knife of
murderous aspect.  He handed it to Ashenden with
a pleased smile on his large, ugly and naked face.
</p>

<p>
"There's a pretty piece of work for you, Mr. Somerville.
I've never seen a better bit of steel in my life, it
takes an edge like a razor and it's strong; you can cut a
cigarette-paper with it and you can hew down an oak.
There is nothing to get out of order and when it is
closed it might be the knife a schoolboy uses to cut
notches in his desk."
</p>

<p>
He shut it with a click and Ashenden put it along
with the revolver in his pocket.
</p>

<p>
"Have you anything else?"
</p>

<p>
"My hands," replied the Mexican with arrogance,
"but those I daresay the custom officials will not make
trouble about."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden remembered the iron grip he had given him
when they shook hands and slightly shuddered.  They
were large and long and smooth; there was not a hair on
them or on the wrists, and with the pointed, rosy,
manicured nails there was really something sinister
about them.
</p>

<p><br /><br /><br /></p>

<p><a id="chap05"></a></p>

<h3>
V
<br /><br />
<i>The Dark Woman</i>
</h3>

<p>
Ashenden and General Carmona went
through the formalities at the frontier
independently and when they returned to their
carriage Ashenden handed back to his companion
the revolver and the knife.  He sighed.
</p>

<p>
"Now I feel more comfortable.  What do you say to
a game of cards?"
</p>

<p>
"I should like it," said Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
The Hairless Mexican opened his bag again and from
a corner extracted a greasy pack of French cards.  He
asked Ashenden whether he played <i>écarté</i> and when
Ashenden told him that he did not suggested piquet.
This was a game that Ashenden was not unfamiliar
with, so they settled the stakes and began.  Since both
were in favour of quick action, they played the game of
four hands, doubling the first and last.  Ashenden had
good enough cards, but the General seemed notwithstanding
always to have better.  Ashenden kept his eyes
open and he was not careless of the possibility that his
antagonist might correct the inequalities of chance, but
he saw nothing to suggest that everything was not above
board.  He lost game after game.  He was capoted and
rubiconed.  The score against him mounted up and up
till he had lost something like a thousand francs, which
at that time was a tidy sum.  The General smoked
innumerable cigarettes.  He made them himself with a
twist of the finger, a lick of his tongue and incredible
celerity.  At last he flung himself against the back of
his seat.
</p>

<p>
"By the way, my friend, does the British Government
pay your card losses when you are on a mission?" he
asked.
</p>

<p>
"It certainly doesn't."
</p>

<p>
"Well, I think you have lost enough.  If it went down
on your expense account I would have proposed playing
till we reached Rome, but you are sympathetic to me.
If it is your own money I do not want to win any more
of it."
</p>

<p>
He picked up the cards and put them aside.  Ashenden
somewhat ruefully took out a number of notes and
handed them to the Mexican.  He counted them and
with his usual neatness put them carefully folded into his
pocket-book.  Then, leaning forward, he patted
Ashenden almost affectionately on the knee.
</p>

<p>
"I like you, you are modest and unassuming, you have
not the arrogance of your countrymen, and I am sure
that you will take my advice in the spirit in which it is
meant.  Do not play piquet with people you don't know."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden was somewhat mortified and perhaps his
face showed it, for the Mexican seized his hand.
</p>

<p>
"My dear fellow, I have not hurt your feelings?  I
would not do that for the world.  You do not play
piquet worse than most piquet players.  It is not that.
If we were going to be together longer I would teach
you how to win at cards.  One plays cards to win money
and there is no sense in losing."
</p>

<p>
"I thought it was only in love and war that all things
were fair," said Ashenden, with a chuckle.
</p>

<p>
"Ah, I am glad to see you smile.  That is the way to
take a loss.  I see that you have good humour and good
sense.  You will go far in life.  When I get back to
Mexico and am in possession of my estates again you
must come and stay with me.  I will treat you like a king.
You shall ride my best horses, we will go to bull-fights
together, and if there are girls you fancy you have only
to say the word and you shall have them."
</p>

<p>
He began telling Ashenden of the vast territories, the
haciendas and the mines in Mexico of which he had been
dispossessed.  He told him of the feudal state in which
he lived.  It did not matter whether what he said was
true or not, for those sonorous phrases of his were
fruity with the rich-distilled perfumes of romance.  He
described a spacious life that seemed to belong to
another age and his eloquent gestures brought before
the mind's eye tawny distances and vast green plantations,
great herds of cattle and in the moonlit night the
song of the blind singers that melted in the air and the
twanging of guitars.
</p>

<p>
"Everything I lost, everything.  In Paris I was driven
to earn a pittance by giving Spanish lessons or showing
Americans&mdash;<i>Americanos del Norte</i>, I mean&mdash;the night life
of the city.  I who have flung away a thousand <i>duros</i> on a
dinner have been forced to beg my bread like a blind
Indian.  I who have taken pleasure in clasping a diamond
bracelet round the wrist of a beautiful woman have been
forced to accept a suit of clothes from a hag old enough
to be my mother.  Patience.  Man is born to trouble as
the sparks fly upward, but misfortune cannot last for
ever.  The time is ripe and soon we shall strike our blow."
</p>

<p>
He took up the greasy pack of cards and set them
out in a number of little piles.
</p>

<p>
"Let us see what the cards say.  They never lie.  Ah,
if I had only had greater faith in them I should have
avoided the only action of my life that has weighed
heavily on me.  My conscience is at ease.  I did what any
man would do under the circumstances, but I regret
that necessity forced upon me an action that I would
willingly have avoided."
</p>

<p>
He looked through the cards, set some of them on one
side on a system Ashenden did not understand, shuffled
the remainder and once more put them in little piles.
</p>

<p>
"The cards warned me, I will never deny that, their
warning was dear and definite.  Love and a dark woman,
danger, betrayal and death.  It was as plain as the nose on
your face.  Any fool would have known what it meant
and I have been using the cards all my life.  There is
hardly an action that I make without consulting them.
There are no excuses.  I was besotted.  Ah, you of the
Northern races do not know what love means, you do
not know how it can prevent you from sleeping, how it
can take your appetite for food away so that you dwindle
as if from a fever, you do not understand what a frenzy it
is so that you are like a madman and you will stick at
nothing to satisfy your desire.  A man like me is capable
of every folly and every crime when he is in love, <i>si</i>,
<i>Señor</i>, and of heroism.  He can scale mountains higher
than Everest and swim seas broader than the Atlantic.
He is god, he is devil.  Women have been my ruin."
</p>

<p>
Once more the Hairless Mexican glanced at the cards,
took some out of the little piles and left others in.  He
shuffled them again.
</p>

<p>
"I have been loved by multitudes of women.  I do
not say it in vanity.  I offer no explanation.  It is mere
matter of fact.  Go to Mexico City and ask them what
they know of Manuel Carmona and of his triumphs.
Ask them how many women have resisted Manuel Carmona."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden, frowning a little, watched him reflectively.
He wondered whether R., that shrewd fellow who chose
his instruments with such a sure instinct, had not this
time made a mistake, and he was uneasy.  Did the Hairless
Mexican really believe that he was irresistible or was
he merely a blatant liar?  In the course of his manipulations
he had thrown out all the cards in the pack but
four, and these now lay in front of him face downwards
and side by side.  He touched them one by one but did
not turn them up.
</p>

<p>
"There is fate," he said, "and no power on earth can
change it.  I hesitate.  This is a moment that ever fills me
with apprehension and I have to steel myself to turn
over the cards that may tell me that disaster awaits me.
I am a brave man, but sometimes I have reached this
stage and not had the courage to look at the four vital
cards."
</p>

<p>
Indeed now he eyed the backs of them with an
anxiety he did not try to hide.
</p>

<p>
"What was I saying to you?"
</p>

<p>
"You were telling me that women found your
fascinations irresistible?" replied Ashenden dryly.
</p>

<p>
"Once all the same I found a woman who resisted
me.  I saw her first in a house, a <i>casa de mujeres</i> in Mexico
City, she was going down the stairs as I went up; she
was not very beautiful, I had had a hundred more
beautiful, but she had something that took my fancy and
I told the old woman who kept the house to send her
to me.  You will know her when you go to Mexico City;
they call her La Marqueza.  She said that the girl was not
an inmate, but came there only from time to time and
had left.  I told her to have her there next evening and
not to let her go till I came.  But I was delayed and when
I arrived La Marqueza told me that the girl had said she
was not used to being kept waiting and had gone.  I am
a good-natured fellow and I do not mind if women are
capricious and teasing, that is part of their charm, so with
a laugh I sent her a note of a hundred <i>duros</i> and promised
that on the following day I would be punctual.  But
when I went, on the minute, La Marqueza handed me
back my hundred <i>duros</i> and told me the girl did not fancy
me.  I laughed at her impertinence.  I took off the
diamond ring I was wearing and told the old woman to give
her that and see whether it would induce her to change
her mind.  In the morning La Marqueza brought me in
return for my ring&mdash;a red carnation.  I did not know
whether to be amused or angry.  I am not used to being
thwarted in my passions, I never hesitate to spend money
(what is it for but to squander on pretty women?), and
I told La Marqueza to go to the girl and say that I would
give her a thousand <i>duros</i> to dine with me that night.
Presently she came back with the answer that the girl
would come on the condition that I allowed her to go
home immediately after dinner.  I accepted with a shrug
of the shoulders.  I did not think she was serious.  I
thought that she was saying that only to make herself
more desired.  She came to dinner at my house.  Did I
say she was not beautiful?  She was the most beautiful,
the most exquisite creature I had ever met.  I was
intoxicated.  She had charm and she had wit.  She had
all the <i>gracia</i> of the Andalusian.  In one word she was
adorable.  I asked her why she had treated me so casually
and she laughed in my face.  I laid myself out to be
agreeable.  I exercised all my skill.  I surpassed myself.
But when we finished dinner she rose from her seat and
bade me good night.  I asked her where she was going.
She said I had promised to let her go and she trusted me
as a man of honour to keep my word.  I expostulated, I
reasoned, I raved, I stormed.  She held me to my word.
All I could induce her to do was to consent to dine with
me the following night on the same terms.
</p>

<p>
"You will think I was a fool, I was the happiest man
alive; for seven days I paid her a thousand silver <i>duros</i> to
dine with me.  Every evening I waited for her with my
heart in my mouth, as nervous as a <i>novillero</i> at his first
bull-fight, and every evening she played with me,
laughed at me, coquetted with me and drove me frantic.
I was madly in love with her.  I have never loved anyone
so much before or since.  I could think of nothing else,
I was distracted.  I neglected everything.  I am a patriot
and I love my country.  A small band of us had got
together and made up our minds that we could no longer
put up with the misrule from which we were suffering.
All the lucrative posts were given to other people, we
were being made to pay taxes as though we were
tradesmen, and we were exposed to abominable affronts.  We
had money and men.  Our plans were made and we were
ready to strike.  I had an infinity of things to do, meetings
to go to, ammunition to get, orders to give; I was so
besotted over this woman that I could attend to nothing.
</p>

<p>
"You would have thought that I should be angry
with her for making such a fool of me, me who had
never known what it was not to gratify my smallest
whim; I did not believe that she refused me to inflame
my desires, I believed that she told the plain truth
when she said that she would not give herself to me
until she loved me.  She said it was for me to make her
love me.  I thought her an angel.  I was ready to wait.
My passion was so consuming that sooner or later, I felt,
at last it must communicate itself to her; it was like a fire
on the prairie that devours everything around it; and at
last&mdash;at last she said she loved me.  My emotion was so
terrific that I thought I should fall down and die.  Oh,
what rapture! oh, what madness!  I would have given
her everything I possessed in the world, I would have
torn down the stars from heaven to deck her hair; I
wanted to do something to prove to her the extravagance
of my love, I wanted to do the impossible, the
incredible, I wanted to give her myself, my soul, my
honour, all, all I had and all I was; and that night when
she lay in my arms I told her of our plot and who we
were that were concerned in it.  I felt her body stiffen
with attention, I was conscious of a flicker of her eyelids,
there was something, I hardly knew what, the hand that
stroked my face was dry and cold; a sudden suspicion
seized me and all at once I remembered what the cards
had told me: love and a dark woman, danger, betrayal
and death.  Three times they'd said it and I wouldn't
heed.  I made no sign that I had noticed anything.  She
nestled up against my heart and told me that she was
frightened to hear such things and asked me if So-and-so
was concerned.  I answered her.  I wanted to make sure.
One after the other, with infinite cunning, between her
kisses she cajoled me into giving every detail of the plot,
and now I was certain, as certain as I am that you sit
before me, that she was a spy.  She was a spy of the
President's and she had been set to allure me with her
devilish charm and now she had wormed out of me all
our secrets.  The lives of all of us were in her hands and I
knew that if she left that room in twenty-four hours we
should be dead men.  And I loved her, I loved her; oh,
words cannot tell you the agony of desire that burned
my heart; love like that is no pleasure; it is pain, pain,
but the exquisite pain that transcends all pleasure.  It is
that heavenly anguish that the saints speak of when they
are seized with a divine ecstasy.  I knew that she must
not leave the room alive and I feared that if I delayed
my courage would fail me.
</p>

<p>
"'I think I shall sleep,' she said.
</p>

<p>
"'Sleep, my dove,' I answered.
</p>

<p>
"'<i>Alma de mi corazón</i>,' she called me.  'Soul of my
heart.'  They were the last words she spoke.  Those
heavy lids of hers, dark like a grape and faintly humid,
those heavy lids of hers closed over her eyes and a little
while I knew by the regular movement of her breast
against mine that she slept.  You see, I loved her, I
could not bear that she should suffer; she was a spy, yes,
but my heart bade me spare her the terror of knowing
what must happen.  It is strange, I felt no anger because
she had betrayed me, I should have hated her because of
her vileness; I could not, I only felt that my soul was
enveloped in night.  Poor thing, poor thing.  I could
have cried for pity for her.  I drew my arm very gently
from around her, my left arm that was, my right was
free, and raised myself on my hand.  But she was so
beautiful, I turned my face away when I drew the knife
with all my strength across her lovely throat.  Without
awaking she passed from sleep to death."
</p>

<p>
He stopped and stared frowning at the four cards that
still lay, their backs upward, waiting to be turned up.
</p>

<p>
"It was in the cards.  Why did I not take their warning?
I will not look at them.  Damn them.  Take them away."
</p>

<p>
With a violent gesture he swept the whole pack on to
the floor.
</p>

<p>
"Though I am a free-thinker I had masses said for her
soul."  He leaned back and rolled himself a cigarette.
He inhaled a long breathful of smoke.  He shrugged his
shoulders.  "The Colonel said you were a writer.  What
do you write?"
</p>

<p>
"Stories," replied Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"Detective stories?"
</p>

<p>
"No."
</p>

<p>
"Why not?  They are the only ones I read.  If I were a
writer I should write detective stories."
</p>

<p>
"They are very difficult.  You need an incredible
amount of invention.  I devised a murder story once,
but the murder was so ingenious that I could never find
a way of bringing it home to the murderer, and after all,
one of the conventions of the detective story is that the
mystery should in the end be solved and the criminal
brought to justice."
</p>

<p>
"If your murder is as ingenious as you think the only
means you have of proving the murderer's guilt is by
the discovery of his motives.  When once you have
found a motive the chances are that you will hit upon
evidence that till then had escaped you.  If there is no
motive the most damning evidence will be inconclusive.
Imagine for instance that you went up to a man in a
lonely street on a moonless night and stabbed him to the
heart.  Who would ever think of you?  But if he was
your wife's lover, or your brother, or had cheated or
insulted you, then a scrap of paper, a bit of string or a
chance remark would be enough to hang you.  What
were your movements at the time he was killed?  Are
there not a dozen people who saw you before and after?
But if he was a total stranger you would never for a
moment be suspected.  It was inevitable that Jack the
Ripper should escape unless he was caught in the act."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden had more than one reason to change the
conversation.  They were parting at Rome and he
thought it necessary to come to an understanding with
his companion about their respective movements.  The
Mexican was going to Brindisi and Ashenden to Naples.
He meant to lodge at the Hôtel de Belfast, which was a
large second-rate hotel near the harbour frequented by
commercial travellers and the thriftier kind of tripper.
It would be as well to let the General have the number of
his room so that he could come up if necessary without
enquiring of the porter, and at the next stopping-place
Ashenden got an envelope from the station-buffet and
made him address it in his own writing to himself at the
post-office in Brindisi.  All Ashenden had to do then was
to scribble a number on a sheet of paper and post it.
</p>

<p>
The Hairless Mexican shrugged his shoulders.
</p>

<p>
"To my mind all these precautions are rather childish.
There is absolutely no risk.  But whatever happens you
may be quite sure that I will not compromise you."
</p>

<p>
"This is not the sort of job which I'm very familiar
with," said Ashenden.  "I'm content to follow the
Colonel's instructions and know no more about it than
it's essential I should."
</p>

<p>
"Quite so.  Should the exigencies of the situation
force me to take a drastic step and I get into trouble I
shall of course be treated as a political prisoner.  Sooner
or later Italy is bound to come into the war on the side of
the Allies and I shall be released.  I have considered
everything.  But I beg you very seriously to have no
more anxiety about the outcome of our mission than if
you were going for a picnic on the Thames."
</p>

<p>
But when at last they separated and Ashenden found
himself alone in a carriage on the way to Naples he
heaved a great sigh of relief.  He was glad to be rid of
that chattering, hideous and fantastic creature.  He was
gone to meet Constantine Andreadi at Brindisi and if
half of what he had told Ashenden was true, Ashenden
could not but congratulate himself that he did not stand
in the Greek spy's shoes.  He wondered what sort of a
man he was.  There was a grimness in the notion of his
coming across the blue Ionian, with his confidential
papers and his dangerous secrets, all unconscious of the
noose into which he was putting his head.  Well, that
was war, and only fools thought it could be waged with
kid gloves on.
</p>

<p><br /><br /><br /></p>

<p><a id="chap06"></a></p>

<h3>
VI
<br /><br />
<i>The Greek</i>
</h3>

<p>
Ashenden arrived in Naples and having
taken a room at the hotel, wrote its number
on a sheet of paper in block letters and posted
it to the Hairless Mexican.  He went to the British
Consulate where R. had arranged to send any
instructions he might have for him and found that they
knew about him and everything was in order.  Then he
put aside these matters and made up his mind to amuse
himself.  Here in the South the spring was well
advanced and in the busy streets the sun was hot.
Ashenden knew Naples pretty well.  The Piazza di San
Ferdinando, with its bustle, the Piazza del Plebiscito,
with its handsome church, stirred in his heart pleasant
recollections.  The Strada di Chiaia was as noisy as ever.
He stood at corners and looked up the narrow alleys
that climbed the hill precipitously, those alleys of high
houses with the washing set out to dry on lines across
the street like pennants flying to mark a feast-day; and he
sauntered along the shore, looking at the burnished sea
with Capri faintly outlined against the day, till he came
to Posilippo, where there was an old, rambling and
bedraggled <i>palazzo</i> in which in his youth he had spent
many a romantic hour.  He observed the curious little
pain with which the memories of the past wrung his
heart-strings.  Then he took a fly drawn by a small and
scraggy pony and rattled back over the stones to the
<i>Galleria</i>, where he sat in the cool and drank an <i>americano</i>
and looked at the people who loitered there, talking, for
ever talking with vivacious gestures, and, exercising his
fancy, sought from their appearance to divine their
reality.
</p>

<p>
For three days Ashenden led the idle life that fitted so
well the fantastical, untidy and genial city.  He did
nothing from morning till night but wander at random,
looking, not with the eye of the tourist who seeks for
what ought to be seen, nor with the eye of the writer
who looks for his own (seeing in a sunset a melodious
phrase or in a face the inkling of a character), but with
that of the tramp to whom whatever happens is absolute.
He went to the museum to look at the statue of Agrippina
the Younger, which he had particular reasons for
remembering with affection, and took the opportunity
to see once more the Titian and the Brueghel in the
picture gallery.  But he always came back to the church
of Santa Chiara.  Its grace, its gaiety, the airy persiflage
with which it seemed to treat religion and at the back of
this its sensual emotion; its extravagance, its elegance of
line; to Ashenden it seemed to express, as it were in one
absurd and grandiloquent metaphor, the sunny, dusty,
lovely city and its bustling inhabitants.  It said that life
was charming and sad; it's a pity one hadn't any money,
but money wasn't everything, and anyway why bother
when we are here to-day and gone to-morrow, and it was
all very exciting and amusing, and after all we must make
the best of things: <i>facciamo una piccola combinazione</i>.
</p>

<p>
But on the fourth morning when Ashenden, having
just stepped out of his bath, was trying to dry himself on
a towel that absorbed no moisture, his door was quickly
opened and a man slipped into his room.
</p>

<p>
"What d'you want?" cried Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"It's all right.  Don't you know me?"
</p>

<p>
"Good Lord, it's the Mexican.  What have you done
to yourself?"
</p>

<p>
He had changed his wig and wore now a black one,
close-cropped, that fitted on his head like a cap.  It
entirely altered the look of him and though this was still
odd enough, it was quite different from that which he
had borne before.  He wore a shabby grey suit.
</p>

<p>
"I can only stop a minute.  He's getting shaved."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden felt his cheeks suddenly redden.
</p>

<p>
"You found him then?"
</p>

<p>
"That wasn't difficult.  He was the only Greek
passenger on the ship.  I went on board when she got in
and asked for a friend who had sailed from the Piræus.
I said I had come to meet a Mr. George Diogenidis.  I
pretended to be much puzzled at his not coming, and I
got into conversation with Andreadi.  He's travelling
under a false name.  He calls himself Lombardos.  I
followed him when he landed and do you know the
first thing he did?  He went into a barber's and had his
beard shaved.  What do you think of that?"
</p>

<p>
"Nothing.  Anyone might have his beard shaved."
</p>

<p>
"That is not what I think.  He wanted to change his
appearance.  Oh, he's cunning.  I admire the Germans,
they leave nothing to chance, he's got his whole story
pat, but I'll tell you that in a minute."
</p>

<p>
"By the way, you've changed your appearance too."
</p>

<p>
"Ah, yes, this is a wig I'm wearing; it makes a
difference, doesn't it?"
</p>

<p>
"I should never have known you."
</p>

<p>
"One has to take precautions.  We are bosom friends.
We had to spend the day in Brindisi and he cannot
speak Italian.  He was glad to have me help him and we
travelled up together.  I have brought him to this hotel.
He says he is going to Rome to-morrow, but I shall not
let him out of my sight; I do not want him to give me
the slip.  He says that he wants to see Naples and I have
offered to show him everything there is to see."
</p>

<p>
"Why isn't he going to Rome to-day?"
</p>

<p>
"That is part of the story.  He pretends he is a Greek
business man who has made money during the war.  He
says he was the owner of two coasting steamers and has
just sold them.  Now he means to go to Paris and have
his fling.  He says he has wanted to go to Paris all his
life and at last has the chance.  He is close.  I tried to get
him to talk.  I told him I was a Spaniard and had been to
Brindisi to arrange communications with Turkey about
war material.  He listened to me and I saw he was
interested, but he told me nothing and of course I did
not think it wise to press him.  He has the papers on his
person."
</p>

<p>
"How do you know?"
</p>

<p>
"He is not anxious about his grip, but he feels every
now and then round his middle, they're either in a belt
or in the lining of his vest."
</p>

<p>
"Why the devil did you bring him to this hotel?"
</p>

<p>
"I thought it would be more convenient.  We may
want to search his luggage."
</p>

<p>
"Are you staying here too?"
</p>

<p>
"No, I am not such a fool as that.  I told him I was
going to Rome by the night train and would not take a
room.  But I must go, I promised to meet him outside
the barber's in fifteen minutes."
</p>

<p>
"All right."
</p>

<p>
"Where shall I find you to-night if I want you?"
</p>

<p>
Ashenden for an instant eyed the Hairless Mexican,
then with a slight frown looked away.
</p>

<p>
"I shall spend the evening in my room."
</p>

<p>
"Very well.  Will you just see that there's nobody in
the passage?"
</p>

<p>
Ashenden opened the door and looked out.  He saw
no one.  The hotel in point of fact at that season was
nearly empty.  There were few foreigners in Naples and
trade was bad.
</p>

<p>
"It's all right," said Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
The Hairless Mexican walked boldly out.  Ashenden
closed the door behind him.  He shaved and slowly
dressed.  The sun was shining as brightly as usual on the
square and the people who passed, the shabby little
carriages with their scrawny horses, had the same air as
before, but they did not any longer fill Ashenden with
gaiety.  He was not comfortable.  He went out and called
as was his habit at the Consulate to ask if there was a
telegram for him.  Nothing.  Then he went to Cook's
and looked out the trains to Rome: there was one soon
after midnight and another at five in the morning.  He
wished he could catch the first.  He did not know what
were the Mexican's plans; if he really wanted to get to
Cuba he would do well to make his way to Spain, and,
glancing at the notices in the office, Ashenden saw that
next day there was a ship sailing from Naples to Barcelona.
</p>

<p>
Ashenden was bored with Naples.  The glare in the
streets tired his eyes, the dust was intolerable, the
noise was deafening.  He went to the <i>Galleria</i> and had
a drink.  In the afternoon he went to a cinema.  Then,
going back to his hotel, he told the clerk that since he
was starting so early in the morning he preferred to pay
his bill at once, and he took his luggage to the station,
leaving in his room only a dispatch-case in which were
the printed part of his code and a book or two.  He
dined.  Then returning to the hotel, he sat down to wait
for the Hairless Mexican.  He could not conceal from
himself the fact that he was exceedingly nervous.  He
began to read, but the book was tiresome, and he tried
another; his attention wandered and he glanced at his
watch.  It was desperately early; he took up his book
again, making up his mind that he would not look at his
watch till he had read thirty pages, but though he ran his
eyes conscientiously down one page after another he
could not tell more than vaguely what it was he read.
He looked at the time again.  Good God, it was only
half-past ten.  He wondered where the Hairless Mexican
was, and what he was doing; he was afraid he would
make a mess of things.  It was a horrible business.  Then
it struck him that he had better shut the window and
draw the curtains.  He smoked innumerable cigarettes.
He looked at his watch and it was a quarter past eleven.
A thought struck him and his heart began to beat
against his chest; out of curiosity he counted his pulse
and was surprised to find that it was normal.  Though it
was a warm night and the room was stuffy his hands and
feet were icy.  What a nuisance it was, he reflected
irritably, to have an imagination that conjured up
pictures of things that you didn't in the least want to see!
From his standpoint as a writer he had often considered
murder and his mind went to that fearful description of
one in <i>Crime and Punishment</i>.  He did not want to think of
this topic, but it forced itself upon him; his book
dropped to his knees and staring at the wall in front of
him (it had a brown wall-paper with a pattern of dingy
roses) he asked himself how, if one had to, one would
commit a murder in Naples.  Of course there was the
Villa, the great leafy garden facing the bay in which
stood the aquarium; that was deserted at night and very
dark; things happened there that did not bear the light of
day and prudent persons after dusk avoided its sinister
paths.  Beyond Posilippo the road was very solitary and
there were byways that led up the hill in which by night
you would never meet a soul, but how would you
induce a man who had any nerves to go there?  You
might suggest a row in the bay, but the boatman who
hired the boat would see you; it was doubtful indeed if
he would let you go on the water alone; there were
disreputable hotels down by the harbour where no
questions were asked of persons who arrived late at
night without luggage; but here again the waiter who
showed you your room had the chance of a good look at
you and you had on entering to sign an elaborate
questionnaire.
</p>

<p>
Ashenden looked once more at the time.  He was
very tired.  He sat now not even trying to read, his mind
a blank.
</p>

<p>
Then the door opened softly and he sprang to his
feet.  His flesh crept.  The Hairless Mexican stood
before him.
</p>

<p>
"Did I startle you?" he asked smiling.  "I thought
you would prefer me not to knock."
</p>

<p>
"Did anyone see you come in?"
</p>

<p>
"I was let in by the night-watchman; he was asleep
when I rang and didn't even look at me.  I'm sorry I'm
so late, but I had to change."
</p>

<p>
The Hairless Mexican wore now the clothes he had
travelled down in and his fair wig.  It was extraordinary
how different he looked.  He was bigger and more
flamboyant; the very shape of his face was altered.  His
eyes were shining and he seemed in excellent spirits.
He gave Ashenden a glance.
</p>

<p>
"How white you are, my friend!  Surely you're not
nervous?"
</p>

<p>
"Have you got the documents?"
</p>

<p>
"No.  He hadn't got them on him.  This is all he had."
</p>

<p>
He put down on the table a bulky pocket-book and a
passport.
</p>

<p>
"I don't want them," said Ashenden quickly.  "Take them."
</p>

<p>
With a shrug of the shoulders the Hairless Mexican
put the things back in his pocket.
</p>

<p>
"What was in his belt?  You said he kept feeling
round his middle."
</p>

<p>
"Only money.  I've looked through the pocket-book.
It contains nothing but private letters and photographs
of women.  He must have locked the documents in his
grip before coming out with me this evening."
</p>

<p>
"Damn," said Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"I've got the key of his room.  We'd better go and
look through his luggage."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden felt a sensation of sickness in the pit of his
stomach.  He hesitated.  The Mexican smiled not
unkindly.
</p>

<p>
"There's no risk, <i>amigo</i>," he said, as though he were
reassuring a small boy, "but if you don't feel happy, I'll
go alone."
</p>

<p>
"No, I'll come with you," said Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"There's no one awake in the hotel and Mr. Andreadi
won't disturb us.  Take off your shoes if you like."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden did not answer.  He frowned because he
noticed that his hands were slightly trembling.  He
unlaced his shoes and slipped them off.  The Mexican
did the same.
</p>

<p>
"You'd better go first," he said.  "Turn to the left and
go straight along the corridor.  It's number thirty-eight."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden opened the door and stepped out.  The
passage was dimly lit.  It exasperated him to feel so
nervous when he could not but be aware that his
companion was perfectly at ease.  When they reached
the door the Hairless Mexican inserted the key, turned
the lock and went in.  He switched on the light.
Ashenden followed him and closed the door.  He noticed that
the shutters were shut.
</p>

<p>
"Now we're all right.  We can take our time."
</p>

<p>
He took a bunch of keys out of his pocket, tried one
or two and at last hit upon the right one.  The
suitcase was filled with clothes.
</p>

<p>
"Cheap clothes," said the Mexican contemptuously
as he took them out.  "My own principle is that it's
always cheaper in the end to buy the best.  After all one
is a gentleman or one isn't a gentleman."
</p>

<p>
"Are you obliged to talk?" asked Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"A spice of danger affects people in different ways.
It only excites me, but it puts you in a bad temper,
<i>amigo</i>."
</p>

<p>
"You see I'm scared and you're not," replied
Ashenden with candour.
</p>

<p>
"It's merely a matter of nerves."
</p>

<p>
Meanwhile he felt the clothes, rapidly but with care,
as he took them out.  There were no papers of any sort
in the suitcase.  Then he took out his knife and slit the
lining.  It was a cheap piece and the lining was gummed
to the material of which the suitcase was made.  There
was no possibility of anything being concealed in it.
</p>

<p>
"They're not here.  They must be hidden in the room."
</p>

<p>
"Are you sure he didn't deposit them in some office?
At one of the consulates, for example?"
</p>

<p>
"He was never out of my sight for a moment except
when he was getting shaved."
</p>

<p>
The Hairless Mexican opened the drawers and the
cupboard.  There was no carpet on the floor.  He looked
under the bed, in it, and under the mattress.  His
dark eyes shot up and down the room, looking for a
hiding-place, and Ashenden felt that nothing escaped
him.
</p>

<p>
"Perhaps he left them in charge of the clerk downstairs?"
</p>

<p>
"I should have known it.  And he wouldn't dare.
They're not here.  I can't understand it."
</p>

<p>
He looked about the room irresolutely.  He frowned
in the attempt to guess at a solution of the mystery.
</p>

<p>
"Let's get out of here," said Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"In a minute."
</p>

<p>
The Mexican went down on his knees, quickly and
neatly folded the clothes, and packed them up again.
He locked the bag and stood up.  Then, putting out the
light, he slowly opened the door and looked out.  He
beckoned to Ashenden and slipped into the passage.
When Ashenden had followed him he stopped and
locked the door, put the key in his pocket and walked
with Ashenden to his room.  When they were inside it
and the bolt drawn Ashenden wiped his clammy hands
and his forehead.
</p>

<p>
"Thank God, we're out of that!"
</p>

<p>
"There wasn't really the smallest danger.  But what
are we to do now?  The Colonel will be angry that the
papers haven't been found."
</p>

<p>
"I'm taking the five o'clock train to Rome.  I shall
wire for instructions there."
</p>

<p>
"Very well, I will come with you."
</p>

<p>
"I should have thought it would suit you better to
get out of the country more quickly.  There's a boat
to-morrow that goes to Barcelona.  Why don't you take
that and if necessary I can come to see you there?"
</p>

<p>
The Hairless Mexican gave a little smile.
</p>

<p>
"I see that you are anxious to be rid of me.  Well, I
won't thwart a wish that your inexperience in these
matters excuses.  I will go to Barcelona.  I have a visa
for Spain."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden looked at his watch.  It was a little after
two.  He had nearly three hours to wait.  His companion
comfortably rolled himself a cigarette.
</p>

<p>
"What do you say to a little supper?" he asked.
"I'm as hungry as a wolf."
</p>

<p>
The thought of food sickened Ashenden, but he was
terribly thirsty.  He did not want to go out with the
Hairless Mexican, but neither did he want to stay in that
hotel by himself.
</p>

<p>
"Where could one go at this hour?"
</p>

<p>
"Come along with me.  I'll find you a place."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden put on his hat and took his dispatch-case in
his hand.  They went downstairs.  In the hall the porter
was sleeping soundly on a mattress on the floor.  As they
passed the desk, walking softly in order not to wake
him, Ashenden noticed in the pigeon-hole belonging to
his room a letter.  He took it out and saw that it was
addressed to him.  They tiptoed out of the hotel and shut
the door behind them.  Then they walked quickly away.
Stopping after a hundred yards or so under a lamp-post
Ashenden took the letter out of his pocket and read it; it
came from the Consulate and said: <i>The enclosed telegram
arrived to-night and in case it is urgent I am sending it round to
your hotel by messenger</i>.  It had apparently been left some
time before midnight while Ashenden was sitting in his
room.  He opened the telegram and saw that it was in code.
</p>

<p>
"Well, it'll have to wait," he said, putting it back in
his pocket.
</p>

<p>
The Hairless Mexican walked as though he knew his
way through the deserted streets and Ashenden walked
by his side.  At last they came to a tavern in a blind alley,
noisome and evil, and this the Mexican entered.
</p>

<p>
"It's not the Ritz," he said, "but at this hour of the
night it's only in a place like this that we stand a chance
of getting something to eat."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden found himself in a long sordid room at one
end of which a wizened young man sat at a piano; there
were tables standing out from the wall on each side and
against them benches.  A number of persons, men and
women, were sitting about.  They were drinking beer
and wine.  The women were old, painted, and hideous;
and their harsh gaiety was at once noisy and lifeless.
When Ashenden and the Hairless Mexican came in they
all stared and when they sat down at one of the tables
Ashenden looked away in order not to meet the leering
eyes, just ready to break into a smile, that sought his
insinuatingly.  The wizened pianist strummed a tune and
several couples got up and began to dance.  Since there
were not enough men to go round some of the women
danced together.  The General ordered two plates of
spaghetti and a bottle of Capri wine.  When the wine
was brought he drank a glassful greedily and then
waiting for the <i>pasta</i> eyed the women who were sitting
at the other tables.
</p>

<p>
"Do you dance?" he asked Ashenden.  "I'm going to
ask one of these girls to have a turn with me."
</p>

<p>
He got up and Ashenden watched him go up to one
who had at least flashing eyes and white teeth to
recommend her; she rose and he put his arm round her.
He danced well.  Ashenden saw him begin talking; the
woman laughed and presently the look of indifference
with which she had accepted his offer changed to one of
interest.  Soon they were chatting gaily.  The dance came
to an end and putting her back at her table he returned
to Ashenden and drank another glass of wine.
</p>

<p>
"What do you think of my girl?" he asked.  "Not bad,
is she?  It does one good to dance.  Why don't you ask
one of them?  This is a nice place, is it not?  You can
always trust me to find anything like this.  I have an
instinct."
</p>

<p>
The pianist started again.  The woman looked at the
Hairless Mexican and when with his thumb he pointed
to the floor she jumped up with alacrity.  He buttoned
up his coat, arched his back and standing up by the side
of the table waited for her to come to him.  He swung
her off, talking, smiling, and already he was on familiar
terms with everyone in the room.  In fluent Italian, with
his Spanish accent, he exchanged badinage with one and
the other.  They laughed at his sallies.  Then the waiter
brought two heaped platefuls of macaroni and when the
Mexican saw them he stopped dancing without ceremony
and, allowing his partner to get back to her table
as she chose, hurried to his meal.
</p>

<p>
"I'm ravenous," he said.  "And yet I ate a good
dinner.  Where did you dine?  You're going to eat some
macaroni, aren't you?"
</p>

<p>
"I have no appetite," said Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
But he began to eat and to his surprise found that he
was hungry.  The Hairless Mexican ate with huge
mouthfuls, enjoying himself vastly; his eyes shone and
he was loquacious.  The woman he had danced with had
in that short time told him all about herself and he
repeated now to Ashenden what she had said.  He
stuffed huge pieces of bread into his mouth.  He ordered
another bottle of wine.
</p>

<p>
"Wine?" he cried scornfully.  "Wine is not a drink,
only champagne; it does not even quench your thirst.
Well, <i>amigo</i>, are you feeling better?"
</p>

<p>
"I'm bound to say I am," smiled Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"Practice, that is all you want, practice."
</p>

<p>
He stretched out his hand to pat Ashenden on the arm.
</p>

<p>
"What's that?" cried Ashenden with a start.  "What's
that stain on your cuff?"
</p>

<p>
The Hairless Mexican gave his sleeve a glance.
</p>

<p>
"That?  Nothing.  It's only blood.  I had a little
accident and cut myself."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden was silent.  His eyes sought the clock that
hung over the door.
</p>

<p>
"Are you anxious about your train?  Let me have one
more dance and then I'll accompany you to the station."
</p>

<p>
The Mexican got up and with his sublime self-assurance
seized in his arms the woman who sat nearest
to him and danced away with her.  Ashenden watched
him moodily.  He was a monstrous, terrible figure with
that blond wig and his hairless face, but he moved with
a matchless grace; his feet were small and seemed to hold
the ground like the pads of a cat or a tiger; his rhythm
was wonderful and you could not but see that the
bedizened creature he danced with was intoxicated by his
gestures.  There was music in his toes and in the long
arms that held her so firmly, and there was music in those
long legs that seemed to move strangely from the hips.
Sinister and grotesque though he was, there was in him
now a feline elegance, even something of beauty, and
you felt a secret, shameful fascination.  To Ashenden he
suggested one of those sculptures of the pre-Aztec
hewers of stone, in which there is barbarism and vitality,
something terrible and cruel, and yet withal a brooding
and significant loveliness.  All the same he would gladly
have left him to finish the night by himself in that sordid
dance-hall, but he knew that he must have a business
conversation with him.  He did not look forward to it
without misgiving.  He had been instructed to give
Manuel Carmona certain sums in return for certain
documents.  Well, the documents were not forthcoming,
and as for the rest&mdash;Ashenden knew nothing about
that; it was no business of his.  The Hairless Mexican
waved gaily as he passed him.
</p>

<p>
"I will come the moment the music stops.  Pay the
bill and then I shall be ready."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden wished he could have seen into his mind.
He could not even make a guess at its workings.  Then
the Mexican, with his scented handkerchief wiping the
sweat from his brow, came back.
</p>

<p>
"Have you had a good time, General?" Ashenden
asked him.
</p>

<p>
"I always have a good time.  Poor white trash, but
what do I care?  I like to feel the body of a woman in my
arms and see her eyes grow languid and her lips part as
her desire for me melts the marrow in her bones like
butter in the sun.  Poor white trash, but women."
</p>

<p>
They sallied forth.  The Mexican proposed that they
should walk and in that quarter, at that hour, there
would have been little chance of finding a cab; but the
sky was starry.  It was a summer night and the air was
still.  The silence walked beside them like the ghost of a
dead man.  When they neared the station the houses
seemed on a sudden to take on a greyer, more rigid line,
and you felt that the dawn was at hand.  A little shiver
trembled through the night.  It was a moment of
apprehension and the soul for an instant was anxious; it
was as though, inherited down the years in their
countless millions, it felt a witless fear that perhaps
another day would not break.  But they entered the
station and the night once more enwrapped them.  One
or two porters lolled about like stage-hands after the
curtain has rung down and the scene is struck.  Two
soldiers in dim uniforms stood motionless.
</p>

<p>
The waiting-room was empty, but Ashenden and the
Hairless Mexican went to sit in the most retired part of it.
</p>

<p>
"I still have an hour before my train goes.  I'll just
see what this cable's about."
</p>

<p>
He took it out of his pocket and from the dispatch-case
got his code.  He was not then using a very elaborate
one.  It was in two parts, one contained in a skin book
and the other, given him on a sheet of paper and
destroyed by him before he left allied territory,
committed to memory.  Ashenden put on his spectacles and
set to work.  The Hairless Mexican sat in a corner of the
seat, rolling himself cigarettes and smoking; he sit there
placidly, taking no notice of what Ashenden did, and
enjoyed his well-earned repose.  Ashenden deciphered
the groups of numbers one by one and as he got it out
jotted down each word on a piece of paper.  His method
was to abstract his mind from the sense till he had
finished, since he had discovered that if you took notice
of the words as they came along you often jumped to a
conclusion and sometimes were led into error.  So he
translated quite mechanically, without paying attention
to the words as he wrote them one after the other.
When at last he had done he read the complete message.
It ran as follows:
</p>

<p>
<i>Constantine Andreadi has been detained by illness at
Piræus.  He will be unable to sail.  Return Geneva and await
instructions</i>.
</p>

<p>
At first Ashenden could not understand.  He read it
again.  He shook from head to foot.  Then, for once
robbed of his self-possession, he blurted out, in a hoarse,
agitated and furious whisper:
</p>

<p>
"You bloody fool, you've killed the wrong man."
</p>

<p><br /><br /><br /></p>

<p><a id="chap07"></a></p>

<h3>
VII
<br /><br />
<i>A Trip To Paris</i>
</h3>

<p>
Ashenden was in the habit of asserting that
he was never bored.  It was one of his
notions that only such persons were as had no
resources in themselves and it was but the stupid that
depended on the outside world for their amusement.
Ashenden had no illusions about himself and such
success in current letters as had come to him had left his
head unturned.  He distinguished acutely between fame
and the notoriety that rewards the author of a successful
novel or a popular play; and he was indifferent to this
except in so far as it was attended with tangible benefits.
He was perfectly ready to take advantage of his familiar
name to get a better state-room on a ship than he had
paid for, and if a Customs-house officer passed his
luggage unopened because he had read his short stories
Ashenden was pleased to admit that the pursuit of
literature had its compensations.  He sighed when eager
young students of the drama sought to discuss its
technique with him, and when gushing ladies
tremulously whispered in his ear their admiration of his
books he often wished he was dead.  But he thought
himself intelligent and so it was absurd that he should be
bored.  It was a fact that he could talk with interest to
persons commonly thought so excruciatingly dull that
their fellows fled from them as though they owed them
money.  It may be that here he was but indulging the
professional instinct that was seldom dormant in him;
they, his raw material, did not bore him any more than
fossils bore the geologist.  And now he had everything
that a reasonable man could want for his entertainment.
He had pleasant rooms in a good hotel and Geneva is
one of the most agreeable cities in Europe to live in.
He hired a boat and rowed on the lake or hired a horse
and trotted sedately, for in that neat and orderly canton
it is difficult to find a stretch of turf where you can have
a good gallop, along the macadamised roads in the
environs of the town.  He wandered on foot about its
old streets, trying among those grey stone houses, so
quiet and dignified, to recapture the spirit of a past age.
He read again with delight Rousseau's <i>Confessions</i>, and
for the second or third time tried in vain to get on with
<i>La Nouvelle Héloïse</i>.  He wrote.  He knew few people,
for it was his business to keep in the background, but he
had picked up a chatting acquaintance with several
persons living in his hotel and he was not lonely.  His
life was sufficiently filled, it was varied, and when he had
nothing else to do he could enjoy his own reflections; it
was absurd to think that under these circumstances he
could possibly be bored and yet, like a little lonely cloud
in the sky, he did see in the offing the possibility of
boredom.  There is a story that Louis XIV, having
summoned a courtier to attend him on a ceremonial
occasion, found himself ready to go as the courtier
appeared; he turned to him and with icy majesty said,
<i>j'ai failli attendre</i>, of which the only translation I can
give, but a poor one, is, I have but just escaped waiting:
so Ashenden might have admitted that he now but just
escaped being bored.
</p>

<p>
It might be, he mused, as he rode along the lake on a
dappled horse with a great rump and a short neck, like
one of those prancing steeds that you see in old pictures,
but this horse never pranced and he needed a firm jab
with the spur to break even into a smart trot; it might be,
he mused, that the great chiefs of the secret service in
their London offices, their hands on the throttle of this
great machine, led a life full of excitement; they moved
their pieces here and there, they saw the pattern woven
by the multitudinous threads (Ashenden was lavish with
his metaphors), they made a picture out of the various
pieces of the jigsaw puzzle; but it must be confessed that
for the small fry like himself to be a member of the
secret service was not as adventurous an affair as the
public thought.  Ashenden's official existence was as
orderly and monotonous as a city clerk's.  He saw his
spies at stated intervals and paid them their wages; when
he could get hold of a new one he engaged him, gave
him his instructions and sent him off to Germany; he
waited for the information that came through and
dispatched it; he went into France once a week to confer
with his colleague over the frontier and to receive his
orders from London; he visited the market-place on
market-day to get any message the old butter-woman
had brought him from the other side of the lake; he kept
his eyes and ears open; and he wrote long reports which
he was convinced no one read, till having inadvertently
slipped a jest into one of them he received a sharp
reproof for his levity.  The work he was doing was
evidently necessary, but it could not be called anything
but monotonous.  At one moment for something better
to do he had considered the possibility of a flirtation
with the Baroness von Higgins.  He was confident now
that she was an agent in the service of the Austrian
Government and he looked forward to a certain entertainment
in the duel he foresaw.  It would be amusing to
set his wits against hers.  He was quite aware that she
would lay snares for him and to avoid them would give
him something to keep his mind from rusting.  He
found her not unwilling to play the game.  She wrote
him gushing little notes when he sent her flowers.  She
went for a row with him on the lake and letting her long
white hand drag through the water talked of Love and
hinted at a Broken Heart.  They dined together and
went to see a performance, in French and in prose, of
<i>Romeo and Juliet</i>.  Ashenden had not made up his mind
how far he was prepared to go when he received a sharp
note from R. to ask him what he was playing at:
information "had come to hand" that he (Ashenden) was
much in the society of a woman calling herself the
Baroness de Higgins, who was known to be an agent of
the Central Powers and it was most undesirable that he
should be on any terms with her but those of frigid
courtesy.  Ashenden shrugged his shoulders.  R. did not
think him as clever as he thought himself.  But he was
intrigued to discover, what he had not known before,
that there was someone in Geneva part of whose duties
at all events was to keep an eye on him.  There was
evidently someone who had orders to see that he did not
neglect his work or get into mischief.  Ashenden was not
a little amused.  What a shrewd, unscrupulous old thing
was R.!  He took no risks; he trusted nobody; he made
use of his instruments, but high or low, had no opinion of
them.  Ashenden looked about to see whether he could
spot the person who had told R. what he was doing.
He wondered if it was one of the waiters in the hotel.
He knew that R. had a great belief in waiters; they had
the chance of seeing so much and could so easily get into
places where information was lying about to be picked
up.  He even wondered whether R. had got his news
from the Baroness herself; it would not be so strange if
after all she was employed by the secret service of one of
the Allied nations.  Ashenden continued to be polite to
the Baroness, but ceased to be attentive.
</p>

<p>
He turned his horse and trotted gently back to
Geneva.  An ostler from the riding-stables was waiting
at the hotel door and slipping out of the saddle Ashenden
went into the hotel.  At the desk the porter handed
him a telegram.  It was to the following effect:
</p>

<p>
<i>Aunt Maggie not at all well.  Staying at Hôtel Lotti,
Paris.  If possible please go and see her.  Raymond.</i>
</p>

<p>
Raymond was one of R.'s facetious <i>noms de guerre</i>, and
since Ashenden was not so fortunate as to possess an
Aunt Maggie he concluded that this was an order to go
to Paris.  It had always seemed to Ashenden that R. had
spent much of his spare time in reading detective fiction
and especially when he was in a good humour he found a
fantastic pleasure in aping the style of the shilling
shocker.  If R. was in a good humour it meant that he
was about to bring off a <i>coup</i>, for when he had brought
one off he was filled with depression and then vented his
spleen on his subordinates.
</p>

<p>
Ashenden, leaving his telegram with deliberate
carelessness on the desk, asked at what time the express left
for Paris.  He glanced at the clock to see whether he had
time to get to the Consulate before it closed and secure
his visa.  When he went upstairs to fetch his passport
the porter, just as the lift doors were closed, called him.
</p>

<p>
"<i>Monsieur</i> has forgotten his telegram," he said.
</p>

<p>
"How stupid of me," said Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
Now Ashenden knew that if an Austrian baroness by
any chance wondered why he had so suddenly gone to
Paris she would discover that it was owing to the
indisposition of a female relative.  In those troublous times
of war it was just as well that everything should be clear
and above board.  He was known at the French Consulate
and so lost little time there.  He had told the porter
to get him a ticket and on his return to the hotel bathed
and changed.  He was not a little excited at the prospect
of this unexpected jaunt.  He liked the journey.  He slept
well in a sleeping-car and was not disturbed if a sudden
jolt waked him; it was pleasant to lie a while smoking a
cigarette and to feel oneself in one's little cabin so
enchantingly alone; the rhythmical sound as the wheels
rattled over the points was an agreeable background to
the pattern of one's reflections, and to speed through the
open country and the night made one feel like a star
speeding through space.  And at the end of the journey
was the unknown.
</p>

<p>
When Ashenden arrived in Paris it was chilly and a
light rain was falling; he felt unshaved and he wanted a
bath and clean linen; but he was in excellent spirits.  He
telephoned from the station to R. and asked how Aunt
Maggie was.
</p>

<p>
"I'm glad to see that your affection for her was great
enough to allow you to waste no time in getting here,"
answered R., with the ghost of a chuckle in his voice.
"She's very low, but I'm sure it'll do her good to see you."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden reflected that this was the mistake the
amateur humorist, as opposed to the professional, so
often made; when he made a joke he harped on it.  The
relations of the joker to his joke should be as quick and
desultory as those of a bee to its flower.  He should make
his joke and pass on.  There is of course no harm if, like
the bee approaching the flower, he buzzes a little; for it
is just as well to announce to a thick-headed world that a
joke is intended.  But Ashenden, unlike most professional
humorists, had a kindly tolerance for other
people's humour and now he answered R. on his own lines.
</p>

<p>
"When would she like to see me, do you think?" he
asked.  "Give her my love, won't you?"
</p>

<p>
Now R. quite distinctly chuckled.  Ashenden sighed.
</p>

<p>
"She'll want to titivate a little before you come, I
expect.  You know what she is, she likes to make the
best of herself.  Shall we say half-past ten, and then
when you've had a talk to her we might go out and
lunch together somewhere."
</p>

<p>
"All right," said Ashenden.  "I'll come to the Lotti at
ten-thirty."
</p>

<p>
When Ashenden, clean and refreshed, reached the
hotel an orderly whom he recognised met him in the hall
and took him up to R.'s apartment.  He opened the door
and showed Ashenden in.  R. was standing with his back
to a bright log fire dictating to his secretary.
</p>

<p>
"Sit down," said R. and went on with his dictation.
</p>

<p>
It was a nicely furnished sitting-room and a bunch of
roses in a bowl gave the impression of a woman's hand.
On a large table was a litter of papers.  R. looked older
than when last Ashenden had seen him.  His thin yellow
face was more lined and his hair was greyer.  The work
was telling on him.  He did not spare himself.  He was up
at seven every morning and he worked late into the
night.  His uniform was spick and span, but he wore it
shabbily.
</p>

<p>
"That'll do," he said.  "Take all this stuff away and
get on with the typing.  I'll sign before I go out to
lunch."  Then he turned to the orderly.  "I don't want
to be disturbed."
</p>

<p>
The secretary, a sub-lieutenant in the thirties,
obviously a civilian with a temporary commission,
gathered up a mass of papers and left the room.  As the
orderly was following R. said:
</p>

<p>
"Wait outside.  If I want you I'll call."
</p>

<p>
"Very good, sir."
</p>

<p>
When they were alone R. turned to Ashenden with
what for him was cordiality.
</p>

<p>
"Have a nice journey up?"
</p>

<p>
"Yes, sir."
</p>

<p>
"What do you think of this?" he asked, looking round
the room.  "Not bad, is it?  I never see why one
shouldn't do what one can to mitigate the hardships of
war."
</p>

<p>
While he was idly chatting R. gazed at Ashenden with
a singular fixity.  The stare of those pale eyes of his, too
closely set together, gave you the impression that he
looked at your naked brain and had a very poor opinion
of what he saw there.  R. in rare moments of expansion
made no secret of the fact that he looked upon his fellow
men as fools or knaves.  That was one of the obstacles he
had to contend with in his calling.  On the whole he
preferred them knaves; you knew then what you were up
against and could take steps accordingly.  He was a
professional soldier and had spent his career in India and
the Colonies.  At the outbreak of the war he was
stationed in Jamaica and someone in the War Office who
had had dealings with him, remembering him, brought
him over and put him in the Intelligence Department.
His astuteness was so great that he very soon occupied
an important post.  He had an immense energy and a gift
for organisation, no scruples, but resource, courage and
determination.  He had perhaps but one weakness.
Throughout his life he had never come in contact with
persons, especially women, of any social consequence;
the only women he had ever known were the wives of
his brother officers, the wives of Government officials
and of business men; and when, coming to London at
the beginning of the war, his work brought him into
contact with brilliant, beautiful and distinguished
women he was unduly dazzled.  They made him feel shy,
but he cultivated their society; he became quite a lady's
man, and to Ashenden, who knew more about him than
R. suspected, that bowl of roses told a story.
</p>

<p>
Ashenden knew that R. had not sent for him to talk
about the weather and the crops, and wondered when he
was coming to the point.  He did not wonder long.
</p>

<p>
"You've been doing pretty well in Geneva," he said.
</p>

<p>
"I'm glad you think that, sir," replied Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
Suddenly R. looked very cold and stern.  He had done
with idle talk.
</p>

<p>
"I've got a job for you," he said.
</p>

<p>
Ashenden made no reply, but he felt a happy little
flutter somewhere about the pit of his stomach.
</p>

<p>
"Have you ever heard of Chandra Lal?"
</p>

<p>
"No, sir."
</p>

<p>
A frown of impatience for an instant darkened the
Colonel's brow.  He expected his subordinates to know
everything he wished them to know.
</p>

<p>
"Where have you been living all these years?"
</p>

<p>
"At 36, Chesterfield Street, Mayfair," returned
Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
The shadow of a smile crossed R.'s yellow face.  The
somewhat impertinent reply was after his own sardonic
heart.  He went over to the big table and opened a
dispatch-case that lay upon it.  He took out a photograph
and handed it to Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"That's him."
</p>

<p>
To Ashenden, unused to Oriental faces, it looked like
any of a hundred Indians that he had seen.  It might have
been the photograph of one or other of the Rajahs who
come periodically to England and are portrayed in the
illustrated papers.  It showed a fat-faced, swarthy man,
with full lips and a fleshy nose; his hair was black, thick
and straight, and his very large eyes even in the photograph
were liquid and cow-like.  He looked ill-at-ease in
European clothes.
</p>

<p>
"Here he is in native dress," said R., giving Ashenden
another photograph.
</p>

<p>
This was full-length, whereas the first had shown only
the head and shoulders, and it had evidently been taken
some years earlier.  He was thinner and his great, serious
eyes seemed to devour his face.  It was done by a native
photographer in Calcutta and the surroundings were
naïvely grotesque.  Chandra Lal stood against a
background on which had been painted a pensive palm tree
and a view of the sea.  One hand rested on a heavily
carved table on which was a rubber-plant in a flower-pot.
But in his turban and long, pale tunic he was not
without dignity.
</p>

<p>
"What d'you think of him?" asked R.
</p>

<p>
"I should have said he was a man not without
personality.  There is a certain force there."
</p>

<p>
"Here's his dossier.  Read it, will you?"
</p>

<p>
R. gave Ashenden a couple of typewritten pages and
Ashenden sat down.  R. put on his spectacles and began
to read the letters that awaited his signature.  Ashenden
skimmed the report and then read it a second time more
attentively.  It appeared that Chandra Lal was a
dangerous agitator.  He was a lawyer by profession, but had
taken up politics and was bitterly hostile to the British
rule in India.  He was a partisan of armed force and had
been on more than one occasion responsible for riots in
which life had been lost.  He was once arrested, tried and
sentenced to two years' imprisonment; but he was at
liberty at the beginning of the war and seizing his
opportunity began to foment active rebellion.  He was at
the heart of plots to embarrass the British in India and so
prevent them from transferring troops to the seat of war
and with the help of immense sums given to him by
German agents he was able to cause a great deal of
trouble.  He was concerned in two or three bomb
outrages which, though beyond killing a few innocent
bystanders they did little harm, yet shook the nerves of
the public and so damaged its morale.  He evaded all
attempts to arrest him, his activity was formidable, he
was here and there; but the police could never lay hands
on him, and they only learned that he had been in some
city when, having done his work, he had left it.  At last a
high reward was offered for his arrest on a charge of
murder, but he escaped the country, got to America,
from there went to Sweden and eventually reached
Berlin.  Here he busied himself with schemes to create
disaffection among the native troops that had been
brought to Europe.  All this was narrated dryly, without
comment or explanation, but from the very frigidity of
the narrative you got a sense of mystery and adventure,
of hairbreadth escapes and dangers dangerously
encountered.  The report ended as follows:
</p>

<p>
"C. has a wife in India and two children.  He is not
known to have anything to do with women.  He neither
drinks nor smokes.  He is said to be honest.  Considerable
sums of money have passed through his hands and
there has never been any question as to his not having
made a proper (!) use of them.  He has undoubted
courage and is a hard worker.  He is said to pride
himself on keeping his word."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden returned the document to R.
</p>

<p>
"Well?"
</p>

<p>
"A fanatic."  Ashenden thought there was about
the man something rather romantic and attractive,
but he knew that R. did not want any nonsense of
that sort from him.  "He looks like a very dangerous
fellow."
</p>

<p>
"He is the most dangerous conspirator in or out of
India.  He's done more harm than all the rest of them
put together.  You know that there's a gang of these
Indians in Berlin; well, he's the brains of it.  If he
could be got out of the way I could afford to ignore
the others; he's the only one who has any guts.  I've
been trying to catch him for a year, I thought there
wasn't a hope; but now at last I've got a chance, and
by God, I'm going to take it."
</p>

<p>
"And what'll you do then?"
</p>

<p>
R. chuckled grimly.
</p>

<p>
"Shoot him and shoot him damn quick."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden did not answer.  R. walked once or twice
across the small room and then, again with his back to
the fire, faced Ashenden.  His thin mouth was twisted by
a sarcastic smile.
</p>

<p>
"Did you notice at the end of that report I gave you,
it said he wasn't known to have anything to do with
women?  Well, that <i>was</i> true, but it isn't any longer.
The damned fool has fallen in love."
</p>

<p>
R. stepped over to his dispatch-case and took out a
bundle tied up with pale blue ribbon.
</p>

<p>
"Look, here are his love-letters.  You're a novelist, it
might amuse you to read them.  In fact you should read
them, it will help you to deal with the situation.  Take
them away with you."
</p>

<p>
R. flung the neat little bundle back into the dispatch-case.
</p>

<p>
"One wonders how an able man like that can allow
himself to get besotted over a woman.  It was the last
thing I ever expected of him."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden's eyes travelled to that bowl of beautiful
roses that stood on the table, but he said nothing.
R. who missed little saw the glance and his look suddenly
darkened.  Ashenden knew that he felt like asking him
what the devil he was staring at.  At that moment R. had
no friendly feelings towards his subordinate, but he
made no remark.  He went back to the subject on hand.
</p>

<p>
"Anyhow that's neither here nor there.  Chandra
has fallen madly in love with a woman called Giulia
Lazzari.  He's crazy about her."
</p>

<p>
"Do you know how he picked her up?"
</p>

<p>
"Of course I do.  She's a dancer, and she does
Spanish dances, but she happens to be an Italian.  For
stage purposes she calls herself La Malaguena.  You
know the kind of thing.  Popular Spanish music and a
mantilla, a fan and a high comb.  She's been dancing all
over Europe for the last ten years."
</p>

<p>
"Is she any good?"
</p>

<p>
"No, rotten.  She's been in the provinces in England
and she's had a few engagements in London.  She never
got more than ten pounds a week.  Chandra met her in
Berlin in a Tingel-tangel, you know what that is, a cheap
sort of music-hall.  I take it that on the Continent she
looked upon her dancing chiefly as a means to enhance
her value as a prostitute."
</p>

<p>
"How did she get to Berlin during the war?"
</p>

<p>
"She'd been married to a Spaniard at one time; I think
she still is though they don't live together, and she
travelled on a Spanish passport.  It appears Chandra
made a dead set for her."  R. took up the Indian's
photograph again and looked at it thoughtfully.  "You
wouldn't have thought there was anything very attractive
in that greasy little nigger.  God, how they run to
fat!  The fact remains that she fell very nearly as much in
love with him as he did with her.  I've got her letters too,
only copies, of course, he's got the originals and I
daresay he keeps them tied up in pink ribbon.  She's mad
about him.  I'm not a literary man, but I think I know
when a thing rings true; anyhow you'll be reading
them, and you can tell me what you think.  And then
people say there's no such thing as love at first sight."
</p>

<p>
R. smiled with faint irony.  He was certainly in a
good humour this morning.
</p>

<p>
"But how did you get hold of all these letters?"
</p>

<p>
"How did I get hold of them?  How do you imagine?
Owing to her Italian nationality Giulia Lazzari was
eventually expelled from Germany.  She was put over
the Dutch frontier.  Having an engagement to dance in
England she was granted a visa and"&mdash;R. looked up a
date among the papers&mdash;"and on the twenty-fourth of
October last sailed from Rotterdam to Harwich.  Since
then she has danced in London, Birmingham, Portsmouth
and other places.  She was arrested a fortnight
ago at Hull."
</p>

<p>
"What for?"
</p>

<p>
"Espionage.  She was transferred to London and I
went to see her myself at Holloway."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden and R. looked at one another for a moment
without speaking and it may be that each was trying his
hardest to read the other's thoughts.  Ashenden was
wondering where the truth in all this lay and R. wondered
how much of it he could advantageously tell him.
</p>

<p>
"How did you get on to her?"
</p>

<p>
"I thought it odd that the Germans should allow her
to dance quite quietly in Berlin for weeks and then for no
particular reason decide to put her out of the country.  It
would be a good introduction for espionage.  And a
dancer who was not too careful of her virtue might make
opportunities of learning things that it would be worth
somebody's while in Berlin to pay a good price for.  I
thought it might be as well to let her come to England
and see what she was up to.  I kept track of her.  I
discovered that she was sending letters to an address in
Holland two or three times a week and two or three
times a week was receiving answers from Holland.  Hers
were written in a queer mixture of French, German and
English; she speaks English a little and French quite
well, but the answers were written entirely in English; it
was good English, but not an Englishman's English,
flowery and rather grandiloquent; I wondered who was
writing them.  They seemed to be just ordinary
love-letters, but they were by way of being rather hot stuff.
It was plain enough that they were coming from
Germany and the writer was neither English, French nor
German.  Why did he write in English?  The only
foreigners who know English better than any continental
language are Orientals, and not Turks or Egyptians
either; they know French.  A Jap would write English
and so would an Indian.  I came to the conclusion that
Giulia's lover was one of that gang of Indians that were
making trouble for us in Berlin.  I had no idea it was
Chandra Lal till I found the photograph."
</p>

<p>
"How did you get that?"
</p>

<p>
"She carried it about with her.  It was a pretty good
bit of work, that.  She kept it locked up in her trunk,
with a lot of theatrical photographs, of comic singers
and clowns and acrobats; it might easily have passed for
the picture of some music-hall artiste in his stage dress.
In fact, later, when she was arrested and asked who the
photograph represented she said she didn't know, it was
an Indian conjuror who had given it her and she had no
idea what his name was.  Anyhow I put a very smart lad
on the job and he thought it queer that it should be the
only photograph in the lot that came from Calcutta.  He
noticed that there was a number on the back, and he
took it, the number, I mean; of course the photograph
was replaced in the box."
</p>

<p>
"By the way, just as a matter of interest how did your
very smart lad get at the photograph at all?"
</p>

<p>
R.'s eyes twinkled.
</p>

<p>
"That's none of your business.  But I don't mind
telling you that he was a good-looking boy.  Anyhow
it's of no consequence.  When we got the number of the
photograph we cabled to Calcutta and in a little while I
received the grateful news that the object of Giulia's
affections was no less a person than the incorruptible
Chandra Lal.  Then I thought it my duty to have Giulia
watched a little more carefully.  She seemed to have a
sneaking fondness for naval officers.  I couldn't exactly
blame her for that; they are attractive, but it is unwise
for ladies of easy virtue and doubtful nationality to
cultivate their society in war-time.  Presently I got a
very pretty little body of evidence against her."
</p>

<p>
"How was she getting her stuff through?"
</p>

<p>
"She wasn't getting it through.  She wasn't trying to.
The Germans had turned her out quite genuinely; she
wasn't working for them, she was working for Chandra.
After her engagement was through in England she was
planning to go to Holland again and meet him.  She
wasn't very clever at the work; she was nervous, but it
looked easy; no one seemed to bother about her, it grew
rather exciting; she was getting all sorts of interesting
information without any risk.  In one of her letters she
said: 'I have so much to tell you, <i>mon petit chou</i> darling,
and what you will be <i>extrêmement intéressé</i> to know,' and
she underlined the French words."
</p>

<p>
R. paused and rubbed his hands together.  His tired
face bore a look of devilish enjoyment of his own
cunning.
</p>

<p>
"It was espionage made easy.  Of course I didn't care
a damn about her, it was him I was after.  Well, as soon
as I'd got the goods on her I arrested her.  I had enough
evidence to convict a regiment of spies."
</p>

<p>
R. put his hands in his pockets and his pale lips
twisted to a smile that was almost a grimace.
</p>

<p>
"Holloway's not a very cheerful place, you know."
</p>

<p>
"I imagine no prison is," remarked Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"I left her to stew in her own juice for a week before I
went to see her.  She was in a very pretty state of nerves
by then.  The wardress told me she'd been in violent
hysterics most of the time.  I must say she looked like
the devil."
</p>

<p>
"Is she handsome?"
</p>

<p>
"You'll see for yourself.  She's not my type.  I daresay
she's better when she's made up and that kind of thing.
I talked to her like a Dutch uncle.  I put the fear of God
into her.  I told her she'd get ten years.  I think I scared
her, I know I tried to.  Of course she denied everything,
but the proofs were there, I assured her she hadn't got a
chance.  I spent three hours with her.  She went all to
pieces and at last she confessed everything.  Then I told
her that I'd let her go scot-free if she'd get Chandra to
come to France.  She absolutely refused, she said she'd
rather die; she was very hysterical and tiresome, but I let
her rave.  I told her to think it over and said I'd see her
in a day or two and we'd have another talk about it.  In
point of fact I left her for a week.  She'd evidently had
time to reflect, because when I came again she asked me
quite calmly what it was exactly that I proposed.  She'd
been in gaol a fortnight then and I expect she'd had
about enough of it.  I put it to her as plainly as I could
and she accepted."
</p>

<p>
"I don't think I quite understand," said Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"Don't you?  I should have thought it was clear to the
meanest intelligence.  If she can get Chandra to cross the
Swiss frontier and come into France she's to go free,
either to Spain or to South America, with her passage paid."
</p>

<p>
"And how the devil is she to get Chandra to do that?"
</p>

<p>
"He's madly in love with her.  He's longing to see
her.  His letters are almost crazy.  She's written to him
to say that she can't get a visa to Holland (I told you she
was to join him there when her tour was over), but she
can get one for Switzerland.  That's a neutral country
and he's safe there.  He jumped at the chance.  They've
arranged to meet at Lausanne."
</p>

<p>
"Yes."
</p>

<p>
"When he reaches Lausanne he'll get a letter from her
to say that the French authorities won't let her cross the
frontier and that she's going to Thonon, which is just on
the other side of the lake from Lausanne, in France, and
she's going to ask him to come there."
</p>

<p>
"What makes you think he will?"
</p>

<p>
R. paused for an instant.  He looked at Ashenden
with a pleasant expression.
</p>

<p>
"She must make him if she doesn't want to go to
penal servitude for ten years."
</p>

<p>
"I see."
</p>

<p>
"She's arriving from England this evening in custody
and I should like you to take her down to Thonon by
the night train."
</p>

<p>
"Me?" said Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"Yes, I thought it the sort of job you could manage
very well.  Presumably you know more about human
nature than most people.  It'll be a pleasant change for
you to spend a week or two at Thonon.  I believe it's a
pretty little place, fashionable too&mdash;in peace-time.  You
might take the baths there."
</p>

<p>
"And what do you expect me to do when I get the
lady down to Thonon?"
</p>

<p>
"I leave you a free hand.  I've made a few notes that
may be useful to you.  I'll read them to you, shall I?"
</p>

<p>
Ashenden listened attentively.  R.'s plan was simple
and explicit.  Ashenden could not but feel unwilling
admiration for the brain that had so neatly devised it.
</p>

<p>
Presently R. suggested that they should have luncheon
and he asked Ashenden to take him to some place where
they could see smart people.  It amused Ashenden to see
R. so sharp, sure of himself and alert in his office, seized
as he walked into the restaurant with shyness.  He talked
a little too loud in order to show that he was at his ease
and made himself somewhat unnecessarily at home.
You saw in his manner the shabby and commonplace
life he had led till the hazards of war raised him to a
position of consequence.  He was glad to be in that
fashionable restaurant cheek by jowl with persons who
bore great or distinguished names, but he felt like a
schoolboy in his first top-hat, and he quailed before the
steely eye of the <i>maitre d'hôtel</i>.  His quick glance darted
here and there and his sallow face beamed with a
self-satisfaction of which he was slightly ashamed.
Ashenden drew his attention to an ugly woman in black, with
a lovely figure, wearing a long row of pearls.
</p>

<p>
"That is Madame de Brides.  She is the mistress of the
Grand Duke Theodore.  She's probably one of the most
influential women in Europe, she's certainly one of the
cleverest."
</p>

<p>
R.'s clever eyes rested on her and he flushed a little.
</p>

<p>
"By George, this is life," he said.
</p>

<p>
Ashenden watched him curiously.  Luxury is dangerous
to people who have never known it and to whom its
temptations are held out too suddenly.  R., that shrewd,
cynical man, was captivated by the vulgar glamour and
the shoddy brilliance of the scene before him.  Just as
the advantage of culture is that it enables you to talk
nonsense with distinction, so the habit of luxury allows
you to regard its frills and furbelows with a proper
contumely.
</p>

<p>
But when they had eaten their luncheon and were
drinking their coffee Ashenden, seeing that R. was
mellowed by the good meal and his surroundings, went
back to the subject that was in his thoughts.
</p>

<p>
"That Indian fellow must be a rather remarkable
chap," he said.
</p>

<p>
"He's got brains, of course."
</p>

<p>
"One can't help being impressed by a man who had
the courage to take on almost single-handed the whole
British power in India."
</p>

<p>
"I wouldn't get sentimental about him if I were you.
He's nothing but a dangerous criminal."
</p>

<p>
"I don't suppose he'd use bombs if he could command
a few batteries and half a dozen battalions.  He
uses what weapons he can.  You can hardly blame him
for that.  After all, he's aiming at nothing for himself, is
he?  He's aiming at freedom for his country.  On the
face of it it looks as though he were justified in his
actions."
</p>

<p>
But R. had no notion of what Ashenden was
talking.
</p>

<p>
"That's very far-fetched and morbid," he said.  "We
can't go into all that.  Our job is to get him and when
we've got him to shoot him."
</p>

<p>
"Of course.  He's declared war and he must take his
chance.  I shall carry out your instructions, that's what
I'm here for, but I see no harm in realising that there's
something to be admired and respected in him."
</p>

<p>
R. was once more the cool and astute judge of his
fellows.
</p>

<p>
"I've not yet made up my mind whether the best men
for this kind of job are those who do it with passion or
those who keep their heads.  Some of them are filled
with hatred for the people we're up against and when
we down them it gives them a sort of satisfaction like
satisfying a personal grudge.  Of course they're very
keen on their work.  You're different, aren't you?  You
look at it like a game of chess and you don't seem to
have any feeling one way or the other.  I can't quite
make it out.  Of course for some sort of jobs it's just
what one wants."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden did not answer.  He called for the bill and
walked back with R. to the hotel.
</p>

<p><br /><br /><br /></p>

<p><a id="chap08"></a></p>

<h3>
VIII
<br /><br />
<i>Giulia Lazzari</i>
</h3>

<p>
The train started at eight.  When he had
disposed of his bag Ashenden walked along
the platform.  He found the carriage in
which Giulia Lazzari was, but she sat in a corner,
looking away from the light, so that he could not see her
face.  She was in charge of two detectives who had taken
her over from English police at Boulogne.  One of them
worked with Ashenden on the French side of the Lake
Geneva, and as Ashenden came up he nodded to him.
</p>

<p>
"I've asked the lady if she will dine in the restaurant-car,
but she prefers to have dinner in the carriage, so
I've ordered a basket.  Is that quite correct?"
</p>

<p>
"Quite," said Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"My companion and I will go into the diner in turn
so that she will not remain alone."
</p>

<p>
"That is very considerate of you.  I will come along
when we've started and have a chat with her."
</p>

<p>
"She's not disposed to be very talkative," said the
detective.
</p>

<p>
"One could hardly expect it," replied Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
He walked on to get his ticket for the second service
and then returned to his own carriage.  Giulia Lazzari
was just finishing her meal when he went back to her.
From a glance at the basket he judged that she had not
eaten with too poor an appetite.  The detective who was
guarding her opened the door when Ashenden appeared
and at Ashenden's suggestion left them alone.
</p>

<p>
Giulia Lazzari gave him a sullen look.
</p>

<p>
"I hope you've had what you wanted for dinner," he
said as he sat down in front of her.
</p>

<p>
She bowed slightly, but did not speak.  He took out
his case.
</p>

<p>
"Will you have a cigarette?"
</p>

<p>
She gave him a glance, seemed to hesitate, and then,
still without a word, took one.  He struck a match, and
lighting it, looked at her.  He was surprised.  For some
reason he had expected her to be fair, perhaps from some
notion that an Oriental would be more likely to fall for
a blonde; but she was almost swarthy.  Her hair was
hidden by a close-fitting hat, but her eyes were
coal-black.  She was far from young, she might have been
thirty-five, and her skin was lined and sallow.  She had
at the moment no make-up on and she looked haggard.
There was nothing beautiful about her but her magnificent
eyes.  She was big, and Ashenden thought she must
be too big to dance gracefully; it might be that in
Spanish costume she was a bold and flaunting figure, but
there in the train, shabbily dressed, there was nothing
to explain the Indian's infatuation.  She gave Ashenden
a long, appraising stare.  She wondered evidently what
sort of man he was.  She blew a cloud of smoke through
her nostrils and gave it a glance, then looked back at
Ashenden.  He could see that her sullenness was only
a mask, she was nervous and frightened.  She spoke in
French with an Italian accent.
</p>

<p>
"Who are you?"
</p>

<p>
"My name would mean nothing to you, madame.
I am going to Thonon.  I have taken a room for
you at the Hôtel de la Place.  It is the only one open
now.  I think you will find it quite comfortable."
</p>

<p>
"Ah, it is you the Colonel spoke to me of.  You are
my jailer."
</p>

<p>
"Only as a matter of form.  I shall not intrude upon
you."
</p>

<p>
"All the same you are my jailer."
</p>

<p>
"I hope not for very long.  I have in my pocket your
passport with all the formalities completed to permit
you to go to Spain."
</p>

<p>
She threw herself back into the corner of the carriage.
White, with those great black eyes, in the poor light,
her face was suddenly a mask of despair.
</p>

<p>
"It's infamous.  Oh, I think I could die happy if I
could only kill that old Colonel.  He has no heart.  I'm
so unhappy."
</p>

<p>
"I am afraid you have got yourself into a very
unfortunate situation.  Did you not know that espionage
was a dangerous game?"
</p>

<p>
"I never sold any of the secrets.  I did no harm."
</p>

<p>
"Surely only because you had no opportunity.  I
understand that you signed a full confession."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden spoke to her as amiably as he could, a little
as though he were talking to a sick person, and there
was no harshness in his voice.
</p>

<p>
"Oh, yes, I made a fool of myself.  I wrote the letter
the Colonel said I was to write.  Why isn't that enough?
What is to happen to me if he does not answer?  I
cannot force him to come if he does not want to."
</p>

<p>
"He has answered," said Ashenden.  "I have the
answer with me."
</p>

<p>
She gave a gasp and her voice broke.
</p>

<p>
"Oh, show it to me, I beseech you to let me see it."
</p>

<p>
"I have no objection to doing that.  But you must
return it to me."
</p>

<p>
He took Chandra's letter from his pocket and gave
it to her.  She snatched it from his hand.  She devoured
it with her eyes, there were eight pages of it, and as she
read the tears streamed down her cheeks.  Between her
sobs she gave little exclamations of love, calling the
writer by pet names French and Italian.  This was the
letter that Chandra had written in reply to hers telling
him, on R.'s instructions, that she would meet him in
Switzerland.  He was mad with joy at the prospect.  He
told her in passionate phrases how long the time had
seemed to him since they were parted, and how he had
yearned for her, and now that he was to see her again so
soon he did not know how he was going to bear his
impatience.  She finished it and let it drop to the floor.
</p>

<p>
"You can see he loves me, can't you?  There's no
doubt about that.  I know something about it, believe me."
</p>

<p>
"Do you really love him?" asked Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"He's the only man who's ever been kind to me.  It's
not very gay the life one leads in these music-halls, all
over Europe, never resting, and men&mdash;they are not
much the men who haunt those places.  At first I
thought he was just like the rest of them."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden picked up the letter and replaced it in his
pocket-book.
</p>

<p>
"A telegram was sent in your name to the address in
Holland to say that you would be at the Hôtel Gibbons
at Lausanne on the 14th."
</p>

<p>
"That is to-morrow."
</p>

<p>
"Yes."
</p>

<p>
She threw up her head and her eyes flashed.
</p>

<p>
"Oh, it is an infamous thing that you are forcing me
to do.  It is shameful."
</p>

<p>
"You are not obliged to do it," said Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"And if I don't?"
</p>

<p>
"I'm afraid you must take the consequences."
</p>

<p>
"I can't go to prison," she cried out suddenly, "I
can't, I can't; I have such a short time before me; he
said ten years.  Is it possible I could be sentenced to
ten years?"
</p>

<p>
"If the Colonel told you so it is very possible."
</p>

<p>
"Oh, I know him.  That cruel face.  He would have no
mercy.  And what should I be in ten years?  Oh, no no."
</p>

<p>
At that moment the train stopped at a station and the
detective waiting in the corridor tapped on the window.
Ashenden opened the door and the man gave him
a picture-postcard.  It was a dull little view of
Pontarlier, the frontier station between France and
Switzerland, and showed a dusty <i>place</i> with a statue in the
middle and a few plane trees.  Ashenden handed her a
pencil.
</p>

<p>
"Will you write this postcard to your lover?  It will
be posted at Pontarlier.  Address it to the hotel at
Lausanne."
</p>

<p>
She gave him a glance, but without answering took
it and wrote as he directed.
</p>

<p>
"Now on the other side write: 'Delayed at frontier
but everything all right.  Wait at Lausanne.'  Then add
whatever you like, <i>tendresses</i>, if you like."
</p>

<p>
He took the postcard from her, read it to see that
she had done as he directed and then reached for his
hat.
</p>

<p>
"Well, I shall leave you now, I hope you will have a
sleep.  I will fetch you in the morning when we arrive
at Thonon."
</p>

<p>
The second detective had now returned from his
dinner and as Ashenden came out of the carriage the
two men went in.  Giulia Lazzari huddled back into her
corner.  Ashenden gave the postcard to an agent who
was waiting to take it to Pontarlier and then made his
way along the crowded train to his sleeping-car.
</p>

<p>
It was bright and sunny, though cold, next morning
when they reached their destination.  Ashenden, having
given his bags to a porter, walked along the platform
to where Giulia Lazzari and the two detectives were
standing.  Ashenden nodded to them.
</p>

<p>
"Well, good morning.  You need not trouble to wait."
</p>

<p>
They touched their hats, gave a word of farewell to
the woman, and walked away.
</p>

<p>
"Where are they going?" she asked.
</p>

<p>
"Off.  You will not be bothered with them any more."
</p>

<p>
"Am I in your custody then?"
</p>

<p>
"You're in nobody's custody.  I'm going to permit
myself to take you to your hotel and then I shall leave
you.  You must try to get a good rest."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden's porter took her hand-luggage and she
gave him the ticket for her trunk.  They walked out of
the station.  A cab was waiting for them and Ashenden
begged her to get in.  It was a longish drive to the hotel
and now and then Ashenden felt that she gave him a
sidelong glance.  She was perplexed.  He sat without a
word.  When they reached the hotel the proprietor&mdash;it
was a small hotel, prettily situated at the corner of a
little promenade and it had a charming view&mdash;showed
them the room that had been prepared for Madame
Lazzari.  Ashenden turned to him.
</p>

<p>
"That'll do very nicely, I think.  I shall come down
in a minute."
</p>

<p>
The proprietor bowed and withdrew.
</p>

<p>
"I shall do my best to see that you are comfortable,
<i>Madame</i>," said Ashenden.  "You are here absolutely
your own mistress and you may order pretty well anything
you like.  To the proprietor you are just a guest
of the hotel like any other.  You are absolutely free."
</p>

<p>
"Free to go out?" she asked quickly.
</p>

<p>
"Of course."
</p>

<p>
"With a policeman on either side of me, I suppose."
</p>

<p>
"Not at all.  You are as free in the hotel as though
you were in your own house and you are free to go out
and come in when you choose.  I should like an assurance
from you that you will not write any letters without
my knowledge or attempt to leave Thonon without my
permission."
</p>

<p>
She gave Ashenden a long stare.  She could not make
it out at all.  She looked as though she thought it a
dream.
</p>

<p>
"I am in a position that forces me to give you any
assurance you ask.  I give you my word of honour that
I will not write a letter without showing it to you or
attempt to leave this place."
</p>

<p>
"Thank you.  Now I will leave you.  I will do myself
the pleasure of coming to see you to-morrow morning."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden nodded and went out.  He stopped for five
minutes at the police-station to see that everything was
in order and then took the cab up the hill to a little
secluded house on the outskirts of the town at which on
his periodical visits to this place he stayed.  It was
pleasant to have a bath and a shave and get into slippers.
He felt lazy and spent the rest of the morning reading
a novel.
</p>

<p>
Soon after dark&mdash;for even at Thonon, though it was
in France, it was thought desirable to attract attention to
Ashenden as little as possible&mdash;an agent from the
police-station came to see him.  His name was Félix.  He was a
little dark Frenchman with sharp eyes and an unshaven
chin, dressed in a shabby grey suit and rather down at
heel, so that he looked like a lawyer's clerk out of work.
Ashenden offered him a glass of wine and they sat down
by the fire.
</p>

<p>
"Well, your lady lost no time," he said.  "Within a
quarter of an hour of her arrival she was out of the hotel
with a bundle of clothes and trinkets that she sold in a
shop near the market.  When the afternoon boat came in
she went down to the quay and bought a ticket to Evian."
</p>

<p>
Evian, it should be explained, was the next place
along the lake in France and from there, crossing over,
the boat went to Switzerland.
</p>

<p>
"Of course she hadn't a passport, so permission to
embark was denied her."
</p>

<p>
"How did she explain that she had no passport?"
</p>

<p>
"She said she'd forgotten it.  She said she had an
appointment to see friends in Evian and tried to persuade
the official in charge to let her go.  She attempted to slip
a hundred francs into his hand."
</p>

<p>
"She must be a stupider woman than I thought,"
said Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
But when next day he went about eleven in the
morning to see her he made no reference to her attempt
to escape.  She had had time to arrange herself, and now,
her hair elaborately done, her lips and cheeks painted,
she looked less haggard than when he had first seen her.
</p>

<p>
"I've brought you some books," said Ashenden.
"I'm afraid the time hangs heavy on your hands."
</p>

<p>
"What does that matter to you?"
</p>

<p>
"I have no wish that you should suffer anything that
can be avoided.  Anyhow, I will leave them and you
can read them or not as you choose."
</p>

<p>
"If you only knew how I hated you."
</p>

<p>
"It would doubtless make me very uncomfortable.
But I really don't know why you should.  I am only
doing what I have been ordered to do."
</p>

<p>
"What do you want of me now?  I do not suppose
you have come only to ask after my health."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden smiled.
</p>

<p>
"I want you to write a letter to your lover telling him
that owing to some irregularity in your passport the
Swiss authorities would not let you cross the frontier,
so you have come here, where it is very nice and quiet,
so quiet that one can hardly realise there is a war, and
you propose that Chandra should join you."
</p>

<p>
"Do you think he is a fool?  He will refuse."
</p>

<p>
"Then you must do your best to persuade him."
</p>

<p>
She looked at Ashenden a long time before she
answered.  He suspected that she was debating within
herself whether by writing the letter and so seeming
docile she could not gain time.
</p>

<p>
"Well, dictate and I will write what you say."
</p>

<p>
"I should prefer you to put it in your own words."
</p>

<p>
"Give me half an hour and the letter shall be ready."
</p>

<p>
"I will wait here," said Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"Why?"
</p>

<p>
"Because I prefer to."
</p>

<p>
Her eyes flashed angrily, but controlling herself she
said nothing.  On the chest of drawers were writing
materials.  She sat down at the dressing-table and began
to write.  When she handed Ashenden the letter he saw
that even through her rouge she was very pale.  It was
the letter of a person not much used to expressing herself
by means of pen and ink, but it was well enough, and
when towards the end, starting to say how much she
loved the man, she had been carried away and wrote
with all her heart, it had really a certain passion.
</p>

<p>
"Now add: 'The man who is bringing this is Swiss,
you can trust him absolutely.  I didn't want the censor
to see it.'"
</p>

<p>
She hesitated an instant, but then wrote as he directed.
</p>

<p>
"How do you spell 'absolutely'?"
</p>

<p>
"As you like.  Now address an envelope and I will
relieve you of my unwelcome presence."
</p>

<p>
He gave the letter to the agent who was waiting to
take it across the lake.  Ashenden brought her the reply
the same evening.  She snatched it from his hands and
for a moment pressed it to her heart.  When she read
it she uttered a little cry of relief.
</p>

<p>
"He won't come."
</p>

<p>
The letter, in the Indian's flowery, stilted English,
expressed his bitter disappointment.  He told her how
intensely he had looked forward to seeing her and
implored her to do everything in the world to smooth
the difficulties that prevented her from crossing the
frontier.  He said that it was impossible for him to come,
impossible; there was a price on his head, and it would
be madness for him to think of risking it.  He attempted
to be jocular, she did not want her little fat lover to be
shot, did she?
</p>

<p>
"He won't come," she repeated, "he won't come."
</p>

<p>
"You must write and tell him that there is no risk.
You must say that if there were you would not dream
of asking him.  You must say that if he loves you he will
not hesitate."
</p>

<p>
"I won't.  I won't."
</p>

<p>
"Don't be a fool.  You can't help yourself."
</p>

<p>
She burst into a sudden flood of tears.  She flung
herself on the floor and seizing Ashenden's knees
implored him to have mercy on her.
</p>

<p>
"I will do anything in the world for you if you will
let me go."
</p>

<p>
"Don't be absurd," said Ashenden.  "Do you think
I want to become your lover?  Come, come, you must
be serious.  You know the alternative."
</p>

<p>
She raised herself to her feet and changing on a sudden
to fury flung at Ashenden one foul name after another.
</p>

<p>
"I like you much better like that," he said.  "Now
will you write or shall I send for the police?"
</p>

<p>
"He will not come.  It is useless."
</p>

<p>
"It is very much to your interest to make him come."
</p>

<p>
"What do you mean by that?  Do you mean that if
I do everything in my power and fail, that..."
</p>

<p>
She looked at Ashenden with wild eyes.
</p>

<p>
"Yes, it means either you or him."
</p>

<p>
She staggered.  She put her hand to her heart.  Then
without a word she reached for pen and paper.  But
the letter was not to Ashenden's liking and he made her
write it again.  When she had finished she flung herself
on the bed and burst once more into passionate weeping.
Her grief was real, but there was something theatrical in
the expression of it that prevented it from being peculiarly
moving to Ashenden.  He felt his relation to her as
impersonal as a doctor's in the presence of a pain that he
cannot alleviate.  He saw now why R. had given him
this peculiar task; it needed a cool head and an emotion
well under control.
</p>

<p>
He did not see her next day.  The answer to the letter
was not delivered to him till after dinner, when it was
brought to Ashenden's little house by Félix.
</p>

<p>
"Well, what news have you?"
</p>

<p>
"Our friend is getting desperate," smiled the Frenchman.
"This afternoon she walked up to the station just
as a train was about to start for Lyons.  She was looking
up and down uncertainly, so I went to her and asked if
there was anything I could do.  I introduced myself as
an agent of the Sûreté.  If looks could kill I should not
be standing here now."
</p>

<p>
"Sit down, <i>mon ami</i>," said Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"<i>Merci</i>.  She walked away, she evidently thought it
was no use to try to get on the train, but I have
something more interesting to tell you.  She has offered a
boatman on the lake a thousand francs to take her across
to Lausanne."
</p>

<p>
"What did he say to her?"
</p>

<p>
"He said he couldn't risk it."
</p>

<p>
"Yes?"
</p>

<p>
The little agent gave his shoulders a slight shrug and
smiled.
</p>

<p>
"She's asked him to meet her on the road that leads
to Evian at ten o'clock to-night so that they can talk
of it again, and she's given him to understand that she
will not repulse too fiercely the advances of a lover.  I
have told him to do what he likes so long as he comes
and tells me everything that is of importance."
</p>

<p>
"Are you sure you can trust him?" asked Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"Oh, quite.  He knows nothing, of course, but that
she is under surveillance.  You need have no fear about
him.  He is a good boy.  I have known him all his life."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden read Chandra's letter.  It was eager and
passionate.  It throbbed strangely with the painful
yearning of his heart.  Love?  Yes, if Ashenden knew
anything of it there was the real thing.  He told her how
he spent the long, long hours walking by the lakeside and
looking towards the coast of France.  How near they
were and yet so desperately parted!  He repeated again
and again that he could not come, and begged her not to
ask him; he would do everything in the world for her,
but that he dared not do, and yet if she insisted how
could he resist her?  He besought her to have mercy on
him.  And then he broke into a long wail at the thought
that he must go away without seeing her, he asked her if
there were not some means by which she could slip over,
he swore that if he could ever hold her in his arms again
he would never let her go.  Even the forced and elaborate
language in which it was written could not dim the
hot fire that burned the pages; it was the letter of a
madman.
</p>

<p>
"When will you hear the result of her interview with
the boatman?" asked Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"I have arranged to meet him at the landing-stage
between eleven and twelve."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden looked at his watch.
</p>

<p>
"I will come with you."
</p>

<p>
They walked down the hill and reaching the quay for
shelter from the cold wind stood in the lea of the
custom-house.  At last they saw a man approaching and Félix
stepped out of the shadow that hid them.
</p>

<p>
"Antoine."
</p>

<p>
"<i>Monsieur Félix</i>?  I have a letter for you; I promised
to take it to Lausanne by the first boat to-morrow."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden gave the man a brief glance, but did not
ask what had passed between him and Giulia Lazzari.
He took the letter and by the light of Félix's electric
torch read it.  It was in faulty German.
</p>

<p>
"<i>On no account come.  Pay no attention to my letters.
Danger.  I love you.  Sweetheart.  Don't come.</i>"
</p>

<p>
He put it in his pocket, gave the boatman fifty francs,
and went home to bed.  But the next day when he went
to see Giulia Lazzari he found her door locked.  He
knocked for some time, there was no answer.  He
called her.
</p>

<p>
"Madame Lazzari, you must open the door.  I want
to speak to you."
</p>

<p>
"I am in bed.  I am ill and can see no one."
</p>

<p>
"I am sorry, but you must open the door.  If you are
ill I will send for a doctor."
</p>

<p>
"No, go away.  I will see no one."
</p>

<p>
"If you do not open the door I shall send for a
locksmith and have it broken open."
</p>

<p>
There was a silence and then he heard the key turned
in the lock.  He went in.  She was in a dressing-gown
and her hair was dishevelled.  She had evidently just
got out of bed.
</p>

<p>
"I am at the end of my strength.  I can do nothing
more.  You have only to look at me to see that I am
ill.  I have been sick all night."
</p>

<p>
"I shall not keep you long.  Would you like to see a
doctor?"
</p>

<p>
"What good can a doctor do me?"
</p>

<p>
He took out of his pocket the letter she had given
the boatman and handed it to her.
</p>

<p>
"What is the meaning of this?" he asked.
</p>

<p>
She gave a gasp at the sight of it and her sallow face
went green.
</p>

<p>
"You gave me your word that you would neither
attempt to escape nor write a letter without my
knowledge."
</p>

<p>
"Did you think I would keep my word?" she cried,
her voice ringing with scorn.
</p>

<p>
"No.  To tell you the truth it was not entirely
for your convenience that you were placed in a
comfortable hotel rather than in the local jail, but
I think I should tell you that though you have your
freedom to go in and out as you like you have no
more chance of getting away from Thonon than if
you were chained by the leg in a prison cell.  It is silly
to waste your time writing letters that will never be
delivered."
</p>

<p>
"<i>Cochon</i>."
</p>

<p>
She flung the opprobrious word at him with all the
violence that was in her.
</p>

<p>
"But you must sit down and write a letter that <i>will</i>
be delivered."
</p>

<p>
"Never.  I will do nothing more.  I will not write
another word."
</p>

<p>
"You came here on the understanding that you would
do certain things."
</p>

<p>
"I will not do them.  It is finished."
</p>

<p>
"You had better reflect a little."
</p>

<p>
"Reflect!  I have reflected.  You can do what you like;
I don't care."
</p>

<p>
"Very well, I will give you five minutes to change
your mind."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden took out his watch and looked at it.  He
sat down on the edge of the unmade bed.
</p>

<p>
"Oh, it has got on my nerves, this hotel.  Why did you
not put me in the prison?  Why, why?  Everywhere I
went I felt that spies were on my heels.  It is infamous
what you are making me do.  Infamous!  What is my
crime?  I ask you, what have I done?  Am I not a
woman?  It is infamous what you are asking me to do.
Infamous."
</p>

<p>
She spoke in a high shrill voice.  She went on and on.
At last the five minutes were up.  Ashenden had not
said a word.  He rose.
</p>

<p>
"Yes, go, go," she shrieked at him.
</p>

<p>
She flung foul names at him.
</p>

<p>
"I shall come back," said Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
He took the key out of the door as he went out of the
room and locked it behind him.  Going downstairs he
hurriedly scribbled a note, called the boots and
dispatched him with it to the police-station.  Then he went
up again.  Giulia Lazzari had thrown herself on her bed
and turned her face to the wall.  Her body was shaken
with hysterical sobs.  She gave no sign that she heard
him come in.  Ashenden sat down on the chair in front
of the dressing-table and looked idly at the odds and
ends that littered it.  The toilet things were cheap and
tawdry and none too clean.  There were little shabby
pots of rouge and cold-cream and little bottles of black
for the eyebrows and eyelashes.  The hairpins were
horrid and greasy.  The room was untidy and the air was
heavy with the smell of cheap scent.  Ashenden thought
of the hundreds of rooms she must have occupied in
third-rate hotels in the course of her wandering life from
provincial town to provincial town in one country after
another.  He wondered what had been her origins.  She
was a coarse and vulgar woman, but what had she been
when young?  She was not the type he would have
expected to adopt that career, for she seemed to have no
advantages that could help her, and he asked himself
whether she came of a family of entertainers (there are
all over the world families in which for generations the
members have become dancers or acrobats or comic
singers) or whether she had fallen into the life accidentally
through some lover in the business who had for a
time made her his partner.  And what men must she have
known in all these years, the comrades of the shows she
was in, the agents and managers who looked upon it as a
perquisite of their position that they should enjoy her
favours, the merchants or well-to-do tradesmen, the
young sparks of the various towns she played in, who
were attracted for the moment by the glamour of the
dancer or the blatant sensuality of the woman!  To her
they were the paying customers and she accepted them
indifferently as the recognised and admitted supplement
to her miserable salary, but to them perhaps she was
romance.  In her bought arms they caught sight for a
moment of the brilliant world of the capitals, and ever
so distantly and however shoddily of the adventure and
the glamour of a more spacious life.
</p>

<p>
There was a sudden knock at the door and Ashenden
immediately cried out:
</p>

<p>
"<i>Entrez</i>."
</p>

<p>
Giulia Lazzari sprang up in bed to a sitting posture.
</p>

<p>
"Who is it?" she called.
</p>

<p>
She gave a gasp as she saw the two detectives who
had brought her from Boulogne and handed her over
to Ashenden at Thonon.
</p>

<p>
"You!  What do you want?" she shrieked.
</p>

<p>
"<i>Allons, levez-vous</i>," said one of them, and his voice
had a sharp abruptness that suggested that he would
put up with no nonsense.
</p>

<p>
"I'm afraid you must get up, Madame Lazzari," said
Ashenden.  "I am delivering you once more to the care
of these gentlemen."
</p>

<p>
"How can I get up!  I'm ill, I tell you.  I cannot stand.
Do you want to kill me?"
</p>

<p>
"If you won't dress yourself, we shall have to dress
you, and I'm afraid we shouldn't do it very cleverly.
Come, come, it's no good making a scene."
</p>

<p>
"Where are you going to take me?"
</p>

<p>
"They're going to take you back to England."
</p>

<p>
One of the detectives took hold of her arm.
</p>

<p>
"Don't touch me, don't come near me," she screamed
furiously.
</p>

<p>
"Let her be," said Ashenden.  "I'm sure she'll see the
necessity of making as little trouble as possible."
</p>

<p>
"I'll dress myself."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden watched her as she took off her dressing-gown
and slipped a dress over her head.  She forced her
feet into shoes obviously too small for her.  She arranged
her hair.  Every now and then she gave the detectives a
hurried, sullen glance.  Ashenden wondered if she would
have the nerve to go through with it.  R. would call him
a damned fool, but he almost wished she would.  She
went up to the dressing-table and Ashenden stood up in
order to let her sit down.  She greased her face quickly
and then rubbed off the grease with a dirty towel, she
powdered herself and made up her eyes.  But her hand
shook.  The three men watched her in silence.  She
rubbed the rouge on her cheeks and painted her mouth.
Then she crammed a hat down on her head.  Ashenden
made a gesture to the first detective and he took a pair of
handcuffs out of his pocket and advanced towards her.
</p>

<p>
At the sight of them she started back violently and
flung her arms wide.
</p>

<p>
"<i>Non, non, non</i>.  <i>Je ne veux pas</i>.  No, not them.  No.
No."
</p>

<p>
"Come, <i>ma fille</i>, don't be silly," said the detective
roughly.
</p>

<p>
As though for protection (very much to his surprise)
she flung her arms round Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"Don't let them take me, have mercy on me, I can't,
I can't."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden extricated himself as best he could.
</p>

<p>
"I can do nothing more for you."
</p>

<p>
The detective seized her wrists and was about to affix
the handcuffs when with a great cry she threw herself
down on the floor.
</p>

<p>
"I will do what you wish.  I will do everything."
</p>

<p>
On a sign from Ashenden the detectives left the room.
He waited for a little till she had regained a certain calm.
She was lying on the floor, sobbing passionately.  He
raised her to her feet and made her sit down.
</p>

<p>
"What do you want me to do?" she gasped.
</p>

<p>
"I want you to write another letter to Chandra."
</p>

<p>
"My head is in a whirl.  I could not put two phrases
together.  You must give me time."
</p>

<p>
But Ashenden felt that it was better to get her to write
a letter while she was under the effect of her terror.  He
did not want to give her time to collect herself.
</p>

<p>
"I will dictate the letter to you.  All you have to do
is to write exactly what I tell you."
</p>

<p>
She gave a deep sigh, but took the pen and the paper
and sat down before them at the dressing-table.
</p>

<p>
"If I do this and ... and you succeed, how do I
know that I shall be allowed to go free?"
</p>

<p>
"The Colonel promised that you should.  You must
take my word for it that I shall carry out his instructions."
</p>

<p>
"I <i>should</i> look a fool if I betrayed my friend and then
went to prison for ten years."
</p>

<p>
"I'll tell you your best guarantee of our good faith.
Except by reason of Chandra you are not of the smallest
importance to us.  Why should we put ourselves to the
bother and expense of keeping you in prison when you
can do us no harm?"
</p>

<p>
She reflected for an instant.  She was composed now.
It was as though, having exhausted her emotion, she had
become on a sudden a sensible and practical woman.
</p>

<p>
"Tell me what you want me to write."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden hesitated.  He thought he could put the
letter more or less in the way she would naturally have
put it, but he had to give it consideration.  It must be
neither fluent nor literary.  He knew that in moments of
emotion people are inclined to be melodramatic and
stilted.  In a book or on the stage this always rings false
and the author has to make his people speak more simply
and with less emphasis than in fact they do.  It was a
serious moment, but Ashenden felt that there were in it
elements of the comic.
</p>

<p>
"I didn't know I loved a coward," he started.  "If you
loved me you couldn't hesitate when I ask you to come....
Underline <i>couldn't</i> twice."  He went on.  "When I
promise you there is no danger.  If you don't love me,
you are right not to come.  Don't come.  Go back to
Berlin where you are in safety.  I am sick of it.  I am
alone here.  I have made myself ill by waiting for you
and every day I have said he is coming.  If you loved me
you would not hesitate so much.  It is quite clear to me
that you do not love me.  I am sick and tired of you.  I
have no money.  This hotel is impossible.  There is
nothing for me to stay for.  I can get an engagement in
Paris.  I have a friend there who has made me serious
propositions.  I have wasted long enough over you and
look what I have got from it.  It is finished.  Good-bye.
You will never find a woman who will love you as I have
loved you.  I cannot afford to refuse the proposition of
my friend, so I have telegraphed to him and as soon as I
shall receive his answer I go to Paris.  I do not blame you
because you do not love me, that is not your fault, but
you must see that I should be a stupid to go on wasting
my life.  One is not young for ever.  Good-bye.  Giulia."
</p>

<p>
When Ashenden read over the letter he was not altogether
satisfied.  But it was the best he could do.  It had
an air of verisimilitude which the words lacked because,
knowing little English, she had written phonetically, the
spelling was atrocious and the handwriting like a child's;
she had crossed out words and written them over again.
Some of the phrases he had put in French.  Once or
twice tears had fallen on the pages and blurred the ink.
</p>

<p>
"I leave you now," said Ashenden.  "It may be that
when next you see me I shall be able to tell you that
you are free to go where you choose.  Where do you
want to go?"
</p>

<p>
"Spain."
</p>

<p>
"Very well, I will have everything prepared."
</p>

<p>
She shrugged her shoulders.  He left her.
</p>

<p>
There was nothing now for Ashenden to do but wait.
He sent a messenger to Lausanne in the afternoon, and
next morning went down to the quay to meet the boat.
There was a waiting-room next to the ticket-office and
here he told the detectives to hold themselves in
readiness.  When a boat arrived the passengers advanced
along the pier in line and their passports were examined
before they were allowed to go ashore.  If Chandra came
and showed his passport, and it was very likely that he
was travelling with a false one, issued probably by a
neutral nation, he was to be asked to wait and Ashenden
was to identify him.  Then he would be arrested.  It
was with some excitement that Ashenden watched the
boat come in and the little group of people gathered
at the gangway.  He scanned them closely but saw no
one who looked in the least like an Indian.  Chandra had
not come.  Ashenden did not know what to do.  He had
played his last card.  There were not more than half a
dozen passengers for Thonon, and when they had been
examined and gone their way he strolled slowly along
the pier.
</p>

<p>
"Well, it's no go," he said to Félix, who had been
examining the passports.  "The gentleman I expected
hasn't turned up."
</p>

<p>
"I have a letter for you."
</p>

<p>
He handed Ashenden an envelope addressed to
Madame Lazzari on which he immediately recognised
the spidery handwriting of Chandra Lal.  At that
moment the steamer from Geneva which was going to
Lausanne and the end of the lake hove in sight.  It
arrived at Thonon every morning twenty minutes after
the steamer going in the opposite direction had left.
Ashenden had an inspiration.
</p>

<p>
"Where is the man who brought it?"
</p>

<p>
"He's in the ticket-office."
</p>

<p>
"Give him the letter and tell him to return to the
person who gave it to him.  He is to say that he took it
to the lady and she sent it back.  If the person asks him
to take another letter he is to say that it is not much
good as she is packing her trunk and leaving Thonon."
</p>

<p>
He saw the letter handed over and the instructions
given and then walked back to his little house in the
country.
</p>

<p>
The next boat on which Chandra could possibly come
arrived about five and having at that hour an important
engagement with an agent working in Germany, he
warned Félix that he might be a few minutes late.  But
if Chandra came he could easily be detained; there was
no great hurry since the train in which he was to be taken
to Paris did not start till shortly after eight.  When
Ashenden had finished his business he strolled leisurely
down to the lake.  It was light still and from the top of
the hill he saw the steamer pulling out.  It was an
anxious moment and instinctively he quickened his
steps.  Suddenly he saw someone running towards him
and recognised the man who had taken the letter.
</p>

<p>
"Quick, quick," he cried.  "He's there."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden's heart gave a great thud against his chest.
</p>

<p>
"At last."
</p>

<p>
He began to run too and as they ran the man, panting,
told him how he had taken back the unopened letter.
When he put it in the Indian's hand he turned frightfully
pale ("I should never have thought an Indian could turn
that colour," he said), and turned it over and over in his
hand as though he could not understand what his own
letter was doing there.  Tears sprang to his eyes and
rolled down his cheeks.  ("It was grotesque, he's fat,
you know.")  He said something in a language the man
did not understand and then in French asked him when
the boat went to Thonon.  When he got on board he
looked about, but did not see him, then he caught sight
of him, huddled up in an ulster with his hat drawn down
over his eyes, standing alone in the bows.  During the
crossing he kept his eyes fixed on Thonon.
</p>

<p>
"Where is he now?" asked Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"I got off first and Monsieur Félix told me to come
for you."
</p>

<p>
"I suppose they're holding him in the waiting-room."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden was out of breath when they reached the
pier.  He burst into the waiting-room.  A group of men,
talking at the top of their voices and gesticulating wildly,
were clustered round a man lying on the ground.
</p>

<p>
"What's happened?" he cried.
</p>

<p>
"Look," said Monsieur Félix.
</p>

<p>
Chandra Lal lay there, his eyes wide open and a thin
line of foam on his lips, dead.  His body was horribly
contorted.
</p>

<p>
"He's killed himself.  We've sent for the doctor.  He
was too quick for us."
</p>

<p>
A sudden thrill of horror passed through Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
When the Indian landed Félix recognised from the
description that he was the man they wanted.  There
were only four passengers.  He was the last.  Félix took
an exaggerated time to examine the passports of the
first three, and then took the Indian's.  It was a Spanish
one and it was all in order.  Félix asked the regulation
questions and noted them on the official sheet.  Then he
looked at him pleasantly and said:
</p>

<p>
"Just come into the waiting-room for a moment.
There are one or two formalities to fulfil."
</p>

<p>
"Is my passport not in order?" the Indian asked.
</p>

<p>
"Perfectly."
</p>

<p>
Chandra hesitated, but then followed the official to
the door of the waiting-room.  Félix opened it and
stood aside.
</p>

<p>
"<i>Entrez</i>."
</p>

<p>
Chandra went in and the two detectives stood up.
He must have suspected at once that they were
police-officers and realised that he had fallen into a trap.
</p>

<p>
"Sit down," said Félix.  "I have one or two questions
to put to you."
</p>

<p>
"It is hot in here," he said, and in point of fact they
had a little stove there that kept the place like an oven.
"I will take off my coat if you permit."
</p>

<p>
"Certainly," said Félix graciously.
</p>

<p>
He took off his coat, apparently with some effort, and
he turned to put it on a chair, and then before they
realised what had happened they were startled to see
him stagger and fall heavily to the ground.  While taking
off his coat Chandra had managed to swallow the
contents of a bottle that was still clasped in his hand.
Ashenden put his nose to it.  There was a very distinct
odour of almonds.
</p>

<p>
For a little while they looked at the man who lay
on the floor.  Félix was apologetic.
</p>

<p>
"Will they be very angry?" he asked nervously.
</p>

<p>
"I don't see that it was your fault," said Ashenden.
"Anyhow, he can do no more harm.  For my part I am
just as glad he killed himself.  The notion of his being
executed did not make me very comfortable."
</p>

<p>
In a few minutes the doctor arrived and pronounced
life extinct.
</p>

<p>
"Prussic acid," he said to Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
Ashenden nodded.
</p>

<p>
"I will go and see Madame Lazzari," he said.  "If she
wants to stay a day or two longer I shall let her.  But if
she wants to go to-night of course she can.  Will you give
the agents at the station instructions to let her pass?"
</p>

<p>
"I shall be at the station myself," said Félix.
</p>

<p>
Ashenden once more climbed the hill.  It was night
now, a cold, bright night with an unclouded sky and
the sight of the new moon, a white shining thread, made
him turn three times the money in his pocket.  When he
entered the hotel he was seized on a sudden with distaste
for its cold banality.  It smelt of cabbage and boiled
mutton.  On the walls of the hall were coloured posters
of railway companies advertising Grenoble, Carcassonne
and the bathing places of Normandy.  He went upstairs
and after a brief knock opened the door of Giulia
Lazzari's room.  She was sitting in front of her dressing-table,
looking at herself in the glass, just idly or despairingly,
apparently doing nothing, and it was in this that
she saw Ashenden as he came in.  Her face changed
suddenly as she caught sight of his and she sprang up
so vehemently that the chair fell over.
</p>

<p>
"What is it?  Why are you so white?" she cried.
</p>

<p>
She turned round and stared at him and her features
were gradually twisted to a look of horror.
</p>

<p>
"<i>Il est pris</i>," she gasped.
</p>

<p>
"<i>Il est mort</i>," said Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"Dead!  He took the poison.  He had the time for
that.  He's escaped you after all."
</p>

<p>
"What do you mean?  How did you know about the
poison?"
</p>

<p>
"He always carried it with him.  He said that the
English should never take him alive."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden reflected for an instant.  She had kept that
secret well.  He supposed the possibility of such a thing
should have occurred to him.  How was he to anticipate
these melodramatic devices?
</p>

<p>
"Well, now you are free.  You can go wherever you
like and no obstacle shall be put in your way.  Here are
your ticket and your passport and here is the money
that was in your possession when you were arrested.
Do you wish to see Chandra?"
</p>

<p>
She started.
</p>

<p>
"No, no."
</p>

<p>
"There is no need.  I thought you might care to."
</p>

<p>
She did not weep.  Ashenden supposed that she
had exhausted all her emotion.  She seemed apathetic.
</p>

<p>
"A telegram will be sent to-night to the Spanish
frontier to instruct the authorities to put no difficulties
in your way.  If you will take my advice you will get
out of France as soon as you can."
</p>

<p>
She said nothing, and since Ashenden had no more
to say he made ready to go.
</p>

<p>
"I am sorry that I have had to show myself so hard
to you.  I am glad to think that now the worst of your
troubles are over and I hope that time will assuage the
grief that I know you must feel for the death of your
friend."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden gave her a little bow and turned to the
door.  But she stopped him.
</p>

<p>
"One little moment," she said.  "There is one thing
I should like to ask.  I think you have some heart."
</p>

<p>
"Whatever I can do for you, you may be sure I will."
</p>

<p>
"What are they going to do with his things?"
</p>

<p>
"I don't know.  Why?"
</p>

<p>
Then she said something that confounded Ashenden.
It was the last thing he expected.
</p>

<p>
"He had a wrist-watch that I gave him last Christmas.
It cost twelve pounds.  Can I have it back?"
</p>

<p><br /><br /><br /></p>

<p><a id="chap09"></a></p>

<h3>
IX
<br /><br />
<i>Gustav</i>
</h3>

<p>
When Ashenden, given charge of a number
of spies working from Switzerland, was first
sent there, R., wishing him to see the sort of
reports that he would be required to obtain, handed him
the communications, a sheaf of typewritten documents,
of a man known in the secret service as Gustav.
</p>

<p>
"He's the best fellow we've got," said R. "His
information is always very full and circumstantial.  I
want you to give his reports your very best attention.
Of course Gustav is a clever little chap, but there's no
reason why we shouldn't get just as good reports from
the other agents.  It's merely a question of explaining
exactly what we want."
</p>

<p>
Gustav, who lived at Basle, represented a Swiss firm
with branches at Frankfort, Mannheim and Cologne,
and by virtue of his business was able to go in and out
of Germany without risk.  He travelled up and down
the Rhine, and gathered material about the movement
of troops, the manufacture of munitions, the state of
mind of the country (a point on which R. laid stress) and
other matters upon which the Allies desired information.
His frequent letters to his wife hid an ingenious code
and the moment she received them in Basle she sent
them to Ashenden in Geneva, who extracted from them
the important facts and communicated these in the
proper quarter.  Every two months Gustav came home
and prepared one of the reports that served as models
to the other spies in this particular section of the secret
service.
</p>

<p>
His employers were pleased with Gustav and Gustav
had reason to be pleased with his employers.  His services
were so useful that he was not only paid more highly
than the others, but for particular scoops had received
from time to time a handsome bonus.
</p>

<p>
This went on for more than a year.  Then something
aroused R.'s quick suspicions; he was a man of an
amazing alertness, not so much of mind, as of instinct,
and he had suddenly a feeling that some hanky-panky
was going on.  He said nothing definite to Ashenden
(whatever R. surmised he was disposed to keep to himself),
but told him to go to Basle, Gustav being then in
Germany, and have a talk with Gustav's wife.  He left
it to Ashenden to decide the tenor of the conversation.
</p>

<p>
Having arrived at Basle, and leaving his bag at the
station, for he did not yet know whether he would have
to stay or not, he took a tram to the corner of the street
in which Gustav lived and, with a quick look to see that
he was not followed, walked along to the house he
sought.  It was a block of flats that gave you the
impression of decent poverty and Ashenden conjectured
that they were inhabited by clerks and small tradespeople.
Just inside the door was a cobbler's shop and Ashenden
stopped.
</p>

<p>
"Does Herr Grabow live here?" he asked in his none
too fluent German.
</p>

<p>
"Yes, I saw him go up a few minutes ago.  You'll
find him in."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden was startled, for he had but the day before
received through Gustav's wife a letter addressed from
Mannheim in which Gustav by means of his code gave
the numbers of certain regiments that had just crossed
the Rhine.  Ashenden thought it unwise to ask the
cobbler the question that rose to his lips, so thanked
him and went up to the third floor on which he knew
already that Gustav lived.  He rang the bell and heard
it tinkle within.  In a moment the door was opened by
a dapper little man with a close-shaven round head and
spectacles.  He wore carpet slippers.
</p>

<p>
"Herr Grabow?" asked Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"At your service," said Gustav.
</p>

<p>
"May I come in?"
</p>

<p>
Gustav was standing with his back to the light and
Ashenden could not see the look on his face.  He felt a
momentary hesitation and gave the name under which
he received Gustav's letters from Germany.
</p>

<p>
"Come in, come in.  I am very glad to see you."
</p>

<p>
Gustav led the way into a stuffy little room, heavy
with carved oak furniture, and on the large table
covered with a table-cloth of green velveteen was a
typewriter.  Gustav was apparently engaged in composing
one of his invaluable reports.  A woman was sitting at
the open window darning socks, but at a word from
Gustav rose, gathered up her things and left.  Ashenden
had disturbed a pretty picture of connubial bliss.
</p>

<p>
"Sit down, please.  How very fortunate that I was in
Basle!  I have long wanted to make your acquaintance.
I have only just this minute returned from Germany."  He
pointed to the sheets of paper by the typewriter.
"I think you will be pleased with the news I bring.  I
have some very valuable information."  He chuckled.
"One is never sorry to earn a bonus."
</p>

<p>
He was very cordial, but to Ashenden his cordiality
rang false.  Gustav kept his eyes, smiling behind the
glasses, fixed watchfully on Ashenden, and it was
possible that they held a trace of nervousness.
</p>

<p>
"You must have travelled quickly to get here only a
few hours after your letter, sent here and then sent on
by your wife, reached me in Geneva."
</p>

<p>
"That is very probable.  One of the things I had to
tell you is that the Germans suspect that information is
getting through by means of commercial letters and so
they have decided to hold up all mail at the frontier for
eight-and-forty hours."
</p>

<p>
"I see," said Ashenden amiably.  "And was it on that
account that you took the precaution of dating your
letter forty-eight hours after you sent it?"
</p>

<p>
"Did I do that?  That was very stupid of me.  I must
have mistaken the day of the month."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden looked at Gustav with a smile.  That was
very thin; Gustav, a business man, knew too well how
important in his particular job was the exactness of a
date.  The circuitous routes by which it was necessary
to get information from Germany made it difficult to
transmit news quickly and it was essential to know
precisely on what days certain events had taken place.
</p>

<p>
"Let me look at your passport a minute," said
Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"What do you want with my passport?"
</p>

<p>
"I want to see when you went into Germany and
when you came out."
</p>

<p>
"But you do not imagine that my comings and goings
are marked on my passport?  I have methods of crossing
the frontier."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden knew a good deal of this matter.  He knew
that both the Germans and the Swiss guarded the
frontier with severity.
</p>

<p>
"Oh?  Why should you not cross in the ordinary way?
You were engaged because your connection with a Swiss
firm supplying necessary goods to Germany made it
easy for you to travel backwards and forwards without
suspicion.  I can understand that you might get past the
German sentries with the connivance of the Germans,
but what about the Swiss?"
</p>

<p>
Gustav assumed a look of indignation.
</p>

<p>
"I do not understand you.  Do you mean to suggest
that I am in the service of the Germans?  I give you my
word of honour ...  I will not allow my straight-forwardness
to be impugned."
</p>

<p>
"You would not be the only one to take money from
both sides and provide information of value to neither."
</p>

<p>
"Do you pretend that my information is of no value?
Why then have you given me more bonuses than any
other agent has received?  The Colonel has repeatedly
expressed the highest satisfaction with my services."
</p>

<p>
It was Ashenden's turn now to be cordial.
</p>

<p>
"Come, come, my dear fellow, do not try to ride the
high horse.  You do not wish to show me your passport
and I will not insist.  You are not under the impression
that we leave the statements of our agents without
corroboration or that we are so foolish as not to keep
track of their movements?  Even the best of jokes cannot
bear an indefinite repetition.  I am in peace-time a
humorist by profession and I tell you that from bitter
experience."  Now Ashenden thought the moment had
arrived to attempt his bluff; he knew something of the
excellent but difficult game of poker.  "We have
information that you have not been to Germany now,
nor since you were engaged by us, but have sat here
quietly in Basle, and all your reports are merely due to
your fertile imagination."
</p>

<p>
Gustav looked at Ashenden and saw a face expressive
of nothing but tolerance and good humour.  A smile
slowly broke on his lips and he gave his shoulders a
little shrug.
</p>

<p>
"Did you think I was such a fool as to risk my life
for fifty pounds a month?  I love my wife."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden laughed outright.
</p>

<p>
"I congratulate you.  It is not everyone who can
flatter himself that he has made a fool of our secret
service for a year."
</p>

<p>
"I had the chance of earning money without any
difficulty.  My firm stopped sending me into Germany
at the beginning of the war, but I learned what I could
from the other travellers.  I kept my ears open in
restaurants and beer-cellars, and I read the German
papers.  I got a lot of amusement out of sending you
reports and letters."
</p>

<p>
"I don't wonder," said Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"What are you going to do?"
</p>

<p>
"Nothing.  What can we do?  You are not under the
impression that we shall continue to pay you a salary?"
</p>

<p>
"No, I cannot expect that."
</p>

<p>
"By the way, if it is not indiscreet, may I ask if you
have been playing the same game with the Germans?"
</p>

<p>
"Oh, no," Gustav cried vehemently.  "How can you
think it?  My sympathies are absolutely pro-ally.  My
heart is entirely with you."
</p>

<p>
"Well, why not?" asked Ashenden.  "The Germans
have all the money in the world and there is no reason
why you should not get some of it.  We could give you
information from time to time that the Germans would
be prepared to pay for."
</p>

<p>
Gustav drummed his fingers on the table.  He took
up a sheet of the now useless report.
</p>

<p>
"The Germans are dangerous people to meddle with."
</p>

<p>
"You are a very intelligent man.  And after all, even if
your salary is stopped, you can always earn a bonus by
bringing us news that can be useful to us.  But it will
have to be substantiated; in future we pay only by
results."
</p>

<p>
"I will think of it."
</p>

<p>
For a moment or two Ashenden left Gustav to his
reflections.  He lit a cigarette and watched the smoke he
had inhaled fade into the air.  He thought too.
</p>

<p>
"Is there anything particular you want to know?"
asked Gustav suddenly.
</p>

<p>
Ashenden smiled.
</p>

<p>
"It would be worth a couple of thousand Swiss francs
to you if you could tell me what the Germans are doing
with a spy of theirs in Lucerne.  He is an Englishman
and his name is Grantley Caypor."
</p>

<p>
"I have heard the name," said Gustav.  He paused a
moment.  "How long are you staying here?"
</p>

<p>
"As long as necessary.  I will take a room at the hotel
and let you know the number.  If you have anything to
say to me you can be sure of finding me in my room at
nine every morning and at seven every night."
</p>

<p>
"I should not risk coming to the hotel.  But I can
write."
</p>

<p>
"Very well."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden rose to go and Gustav accompanied him
to the door.
</p>

<p>
"We part without ill-feeling then?" he asked.
</p>

<p>
"Of course.  Your reports will remain in our archives
as models of what a report should be."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden spent two or three days visiting Basle.  It
did not much amuse him.  He passed a good deal of time
in the book-shops turning over the pages of books that
would have been worth reading if life were a thousand
years long.  Once he saw Gustav in the street.  On the
fourth morning a letter was brought up with his coffee.
The envelope was that of a commercial firm unknown
to him and inside it was a typewritten sheet.  There was
no address and no signature.  Ashenden wondered if
Gustav was aware that a typewriter could betray its
owner as certainly as a handwriting.  Having twice carefully
read the letter, he held the paper up to the light to
see the watermark (he had no reason for doing this
except that the sleuths of detective novels always did
it), then struck a match and watched it burn.  He
scrunched up the charred fragments in his hand.
</p>

<p>
He got up, for he had taken advantage of his situation
to breakfast in bed, packed his bag and took the next
train to Berne.  From there he was able to send a code
telegram to R.  His instructions were given to him
verbally two days later, in the bedroom of his hotel at
an hour when no one was likely to be seen walking along
a corridor, and within twenty-four hours, though by a
circuitous route, he arrived at Lucerne.
</p>

<p><br /><br /><br /></p>

<p><a id="chap10"></a></p>

<h3>
X
<br /><br />
<i>The Traitor</i>
</h3>

<p>
Having taken a room at the hotel at which
he had been instructed to stay, Ashenden
went out; it was a lovely day, early in August,
and the sun shone in an unclouded sky.  He had not
been to Lucerne since he was a boy and but vaguely
remembered a covered bridge, a great stone lion and a
church in which he had sat, bored yet impressed, while
they played an organ; and now wandering along a
shady quay (and the lake looked just as tawdry and
unreal as it looked on the picture-postcards) he tried
not so much to find his way about a half-forgotten scene
as to reform in his mind some recollection of the shy and
eager lad, so impatient for life (which he saw not in the
present of his adolescence but only in the future of his
manhood) who so long ago had wandered there.  But it
seemed to him that the most vivid of his memories was
not of himself, but of the crowd; he seemed to remember
sun and heat and people; the train was crowded and so
was the hotel, the lake steamers were packed and on the
quays and in the streets you threaded your way among
the throng of holiday makers.  They were fat and old and
ugly and odd, and they stank.  Now, in wartime, Lucerne
was as deserted as it must have been before the world at
large discovered that Switzerland was the playground of
Europe.  Most of the hotels were closed, the streets were
empty, the rowing boats for hire rocked idly at the
water's edge and there was none to take them, and in the
avenues by the lake the only persons to be seen were
serious Swiss taking their neutrality, like a dachshund,
for a walk with them.  Ashenden felt exhilarated by the
solitude, and sitting down on a bench that faced the
water, surrendered himself deliberately to the sensation.
It was true that the lake was absurd, the water was too
blue, the mountains too snowy, and its beauty, hitting
you in the face, exasperated rather than thrilled; but all
the same there was something pleasing in the prospect,
an artless candour, like one of Mendelssohn's <i>Songs
without Words</i>, that made Ashenden smile with
complacency.  Lucerne reminded him of wax flowers under
glass cases and cuckoo clocks and fancy work in Berlin
wool.  So long at all events as the fine weather lasted he
was prepared to enjoy himself.  He did not see why he
should not at least try to combine pleasure to himself
with profit to his country.  He was travelling with a
brand-new passport in his pocket, under a borrowed
name, and this gave him an agreeable sense of owning a
new personality.  He was often slightly tired of himself
and it diverted him for a while to be merely a creature of
R.'s facile invention.  The experience he had just enjoyed
appealed to his acute sense of the absurd.  R., it is true,
had not seen the fun of it: what humour R. possessed was
of a sardonic turn and he had no facility for taking in
good part a joke at his own expense.  To do that you
must be able to look at yourself from the outside and be
at the same time spectator and actor in the pleasant
comedy of life.  R. was a soldier and regarded
introspection as unhealthy, un-English and unpatriotic.
</p>

<p>
Ashenden got up and strolled slowly to his hotel.  It
was a small German hotel, of the second class, spotlessly
clean, and his bedroom had a nice view; it was furnished
with brightly varnished pitch-pine, and though on a cold
wet day it would have been wretched, in that warm and
sunny weather it was gay and pleasing.  There were
tables in the hall and he sat down at one of these and
ordered a bottle of beer.  The landlady was curious to
know why in that dead season he had come to stay and
he was glad to satisfy her curiosity.  He told her that he
had recently recovered from an attack of typhoid and
had come to Lucerne to get back his strength.  He was
employed in the Censorship Department and was taking
the opportunity to brush up his rusty German.  He asked
her if she could recommend to him a German teacher.
The landlady was a blonde and blowsy Swiss,
good-humoured and talkative, so that Ashenden felt pretty
sure that she would repeat in the proper quarter the
information he gave her.  It was his turn now to ask a
few questions.  She was voluble on the subject of the
war on account of which the hotel, in that month so full
that rooms had to be found for visitors in neighbouring
houses, was nearly empty.  A few people came in from
outside to eat their meals <i>en pension</i>, but she had only two
lots of resident guests.  One was an old Irish couple who
lived in Vevey and passed their summers in Lucerne and
the other was an Englishman and his wife.  She was a
German and they were obliged on that account to live in
a neutral country.  Ashenden took care to show little
curiosity about them&mdash;he recognised in the description
Grantley Caypor&mdash;but of her own accord she told him
that they spent most of the day walking about the
mountains.  Herr Caypor was a botanist and much interested
in the flora of the country.  His lady was a very nice
woman and she felt her position keenly.  Ah, well, the
war could not last for ever.  The landlady bustled away
and Ashenden went upstairs.
</p>

<p>
Dinner was at seven, and, wishing to be in the dining-room
before anyone else so that he could take stock of
his fellow-guests as they entered, he went down as soon
as he heard the bell.  It was a very plain, stiff,
whitewashed room, with chairs of the same shiny pitchpine as
in his bedroom, and on the walls were oleographs of
Swiss lakes.  On each little table was a bunch of flowers.
It was all neat and clean and presaged a bad dinner.
Ashenden would have liked to make up for it by ordering
a bottle of the best Rhine-wine to be found in the hotel,
but did not venture to draw attention to himself by
extravagance (he saw on two or three tables half-empty
bottles of table hock, which made him surmise that his
fellow-guests drank thriftily), and so contented himself
with ordering a pint of lager.  Presently one or two
persons came in, single men with some occupation in
Lucerne and obviously Swiss, and sat down each at his
own little table and untied the napkins that at the end of
luncheon they had neatly tied up.  They propped
newspapers against their water-jugs and read while they
somewhat noisily ate their soup.  Then entered a very
old tall bent man, with white hair and a drooping white
moustache, accompanied by a little old white-haired lady
in black.  These were certainly the Irish colonel and his
wife of whom the landlady had spoken.  They took their
seats and the colonel poured out a thimbleful of wine for
his wife and a thimbleful for himself.  They waited in
silence for their dinner to be served to them by the
buxom, hearty maid.
</p>

<p>
At last the persons arrived for whom Ashenden had
been waiting.  He was doing his best to read a German
book and it was only by an exercise of self-control that he
allowed himself only for one instant to raise his eyes as
they came in.  His glance showed him a man of about
forty-five with short dark hair, somewhat grizzled, of
middle height, but corpulent, with a broad red
clean-shaven face.  He wore a shirt open at the neck, with a
wide collar, and a grey suit.  He walked ahead of his wife,
and of her Ashenden only caught the impression of a
German woman self-effaced and dusty.  Grantley Caypor
sat down and began in a loud voice explaining to the
waitress that they had taken an immense walk.  They had
been up some mountain the name of which meant
nothing to Ashenden, but which excited in the maid
expressions of astonishment and enthusiasm.  Then
Caypor, still in fluent German but with a marked English
accent, said that they were so late they had not even gone
up to wash, but had just rinsed their hands outside.  He
had a resonant voice and a jovial manner.
</p>

<p>
"Serve me quick, we're starving with hunger, and bring
beer, bring three bottles.  <i>Lieber Gott</i>, what a thirst I
have!"
</p>

<p>
He seemed to be a man of exuberant vitality.  He
brought into that dull, overclean dining-room the
breath of life and everyone in it appeared on a sudden
more alert.  He began to talk to his wife, in English, and
everything he said could be heard by all; but presently
she interrupted him with a remark made in an undertone.
Caypor stopped and Ashenden felt that his eyes were
turned in his direction.  Mrs. Caypor had noticed the
arrival of a stranger and had drawn her husband's
attention to it.  Ashenden turned the page of the book he
was pretending to read, but he felt that Caypor's gaze
was fixed intently upon him.  When he addressed his
wife again it was in so low a tone that Ashenden could
not even tell what language he used, but when the maid
brought them their soup Caypor, his voice still low,
asked her a question.  It was plain that he was enquiring
who Ashenden was.  Ashenden could catch of the maid's
reply but the one word <i>Länder</i>.
</p>

<p>
One or two people finished their dinner and went out
picking their teeth.  The old Irish colonel and his old
wife rose from their table and he stood aside to let her
pass.  They had eaten their meal without exchanging a
word.  She walked slowly to the door; but the colonel
stopped to say a word to a Swiss who might have been a
local attorney, and when she reached it she stood there,
bowed and with a sheep-like look, patiently waiting for
her husband to come and open it for her.  Ashenden
realised that she had never opened a door for herself.
She did not know how to.  In a minute the colonel with
his old, old gait came to the door and opened it; she
passed out and he followed.  The little incident offered a
key to their whole lives, and from it Ashenden began to
reconstruct their histories, circumstances and characters;
but he pulled himself up: he could not allow himself the
luxury of creation.  He finished his dinner.
</p>

<p>
When he went into the hall he saw tied to the leg of
table a bull-terrier and in passing mechanically put down
his hand to fondle the dog's drooping, soft ears.  The
landlady was standing at the foot of the stairs.
</p>

<p>
"Whose is this lovely beast?" asked Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"He belongs to Herr Caypor.  Fritzi, he is called.
Herr Caypor says he has a longer pedigree than the
King of England."
</p>

<p>
Fritzi rubbed himself against Ashenden's leg and with
his nose sought the palm of his hand.  Ashenden went
upstairs to fetch his hat, and when he came down saw
Caypor standing at the entrance of the hotel talking with
the landlady.  From the sudden silence and their
constrained manner he guessed that Caypor had been making
enquiries about him.  When he passed between them,
into the street, out of the corner of his eye he saw
Caypor give him a suspicious stare.  That frank, jovial
red face bore then a look of shifty cunning.
</p>

<p>
Ashenden strolled along till he found a tavern where
he could have his coffee in the open and to compensate
himself for the bottle of beer that his sense of duty had
urged him to drink at dinner ordered the best brandy the
house provided.  He was pleased at last to have come
face to face with the man of whom he had heard so much
and in a day or two hoped to become acquainted with
him.  It is never very difficult to get to know anyone who
has a dog.  But he was in no hurry; he would let things
take their course: with the object he had in view he could
not afford to be hasty.
</p>

<p>
Ashenden reviewed the circumstances.  Grantley
Caypor was an Englishman, born according to his
passport in Birmingham, and he was forty-two years of age.
His wife, to whom he had been married for eleven years,
was of German birth and parentage.  That was public
knowledge.  Information about his antecedents was
contained in a private document.  He had started life,
according to this, in a lawyer's office in Birmingham and
then had drifted into journalism.  He had been connected
with an English paper in Cairo and with another in
Shanghai.  There he got into trouble for attempting to
get money on false pretences and was sentenced to a
short term of imprisonment.  All trace of him was lost
for two years after his release, when he reappeared in a
shipping-office in Marseilles.  From there, still in the
shipping business, he went to Hamburg, where he
married, and to London.  In London he set up for
himself, in the export business, but after some time failed
and was made a bankrupt.  He returned to journalism.
At the outbreak of war he was once more in the
shipping business, and in August, 1914, was living
quietly with his German wife at Southampton.  In the
beginning of the following year he told his employers
that owing to the nationality of his wife his position was
intolerable; they had no fault to find with him and,
recognising that he was in an awkward fix, granted his
request that he should be transferred to Genoa.  Here
he remained till Italy entered the war, but then gave
notice and with his papers in perfect order crossed the
border and took up his residence in Switzerland.
</p>

<p>
All this indicated a man of doubtful honesty and
unsettled disposition, with no background and of no
financial standing; but the facts were of no importance to
anyone till it was discovered that Caypor, certainly from
the beginning of the war and perhaps sooner, was in the
service of the German Intelligence Department.  He had
a salary of forty pounds a month.  But though dangerous
and wily no steps would have been taken to deal with
him if he had contented himself with transmitting such
news as he was able to get in Switzerland.  He could do
no great harm there and it might even be possible to
make use of him to convey information that it was
desirable to let the enemy have.  He had no notion that
anything was known of him.  His letters, and he received
a good many, were closely censored; there were few
codes that the people who dealt with such matters could
not in the end decipher and it might be that sooner or
later through him it would be possible to lay hands on
the organisation that still flourished in England.  But
then he did something that drew R.'s attention to him.
Had he known it none could have blamed him for
shaking in his shoes: R. was not a very nice man to get
on the wrong side of.  Caypor scraped acquaintance in
Zürich with a young Spaniard, Gomez by name, who
had lately entered the British secret service, by his
nationality inspired him with confidence, and managed
to worm out of him the fact that he was engaged in
espionage.  Probably the Spaniard, with a very human
desire to seem important, had done no more than talk
mysteriously; but on Caypor's information he was
watched when he went to Germany and one day caught
just as he was posting a letter in a code that was
eventually deciphered.  He was tried, convicted and shot.  It
was bad enough to lose a useful and disinterested agent,
but it entailed besides the changing of a safe and simple
code.  R. was not pleased.  But R. was not the man to let
any desire of revenge stand in the way of his main object,
and it occurred to him that if Caypor was merely
betraying his country for money it might be possible to
get him to take more money to betray his employers.
The fact that he had succeeded in delivering into their
hands an agent of the Allies must seem to them an
earnest of his good faith.  He might be very useful.  But
R. had no notion what kind of man Caypor was, he had
lived his shabby, furtive life obscurely, and the only
photograph that existed of him was one taken for a
passport.  Ashenden's instructions were to get acquainted
with Caypor and see whether there was any chance that
he would work honestly for the British: if he thought
there was, he was entitled to sound him and if his
suggestions were met with favour to make certain propositions.
It was a task that needed tact and a knowledge of
men.  If on the other hand Ashenden came to the
conclusion that Caypor could not be bought, he was to
watch and report his movements.  The information he
had obtained from Gustav was vague, but important;
there was only one point in it that was interesting, and
this was that the head of the German Intelligence
Department in Berne was growing restive at Caypor's
lack of activity.  Caypor was asking for a higher salary
and Major von P. had told him that he must earn it.  It
might be that he was urging him to go to England.  If
he could be induced to cross the frontier Ashenden's
work was done.
</p>

<p>
"How the devil do you expect <i>me</i> to persuade him to
put his head in a noose?" asked Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"It won't be a noose, it'll be a firing squad," said R.
</p>

<p>
"Caypor's clever."
</p>

<p>
"Well, be cleverer, damn your eyes."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden made up his mind that he would take no
steps to make Caypor's acquaintance, but allow the first
advances to be made by him.  If he was being pressed for
results it must surely occur to him that it would be worth
while to get into conversation with an Englishman who
was employed in the Censorship Department.  Ashenden
was prepared with a supply of information that it could
not in the least benefit the Central Powers to possess.
With a false name and a false passport he had little to fear
that Caypor would guess that he was a British agent.
</p>

<p>
Ashenden did not have to wait long.  Next day he was
sitting in the doorway of the hotel, drinking a cup of
coffee and already half asleep after a substantial
<i>Mittagessen</i>, when the Caypors came out of the dining-room.
Mrs. Caypor went upstairs and Caypor released his dog.
The dog bounded along and in a friendly fashion leaped
up against Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"Come here, Fritzi," cried Caypor, and then to
Ashenden: "I'm so sorry.  But he's quite gentle."
</p>

<p>
"Oh, that's all right.  He won't hurt me."
</p>

<p>
Caypor stopped at the doorway.
</p>

<p>
"He's a bull-terrier.  You don't often see them on the
Continent."  He seemed while he spoke to be taking
Ashenden's measure; he called to the maid: "A coffee,
please, <i>Fräulein</i>.  You've just arrived, haven't you?"
</p>

<p>
"Yes, I came yesterday."
</p>

<p>
"Really?  I didn't see you in the dining-room last
night.  Are you making a stay?"
</p>

<p>
"I don't know.  I've been ill and I've come here to
recuperate."
</p>

<p>
The maid came with the coffee and seeing Caypor
talking to Ashenden put the tray on the table at which
he was sitting.  Caypor gave a laugh of faint
embarrassment.
</p>

<p>
"I don't want to force myself upon you.  I don't know
why the maid put my coffee on your table."
</p>

<p>
"Please sit down," said Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"It's very good of you.  I've lived so long on the
Continent that I'm always forgetting that my countrymen
are apt to look upon it as confounded cheek if you talk to
them.  Are you English, by the way, or American?"
</p>

<p>
"English," said Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
Ashenden was by nature a very shy person, and he had
in vain tried to cure himself of a failing that at his age was
unseemly, but on occasion he knew how to make effective
use of it.  He explained now in a hesitating and
awkward manner the facts that he had the day before
told the landlady and that he was convinced she had
already passed on to Caypor.
</p>

<p>
"You couldn't have come to a better place than
Lucerne.  It's an oasis of peace in this war-weary world.
When you're here you might almost forget that there is
such a thing as a war going on.  That is why I've come
here.  I'm a journalist by profession."
</p>

<p>
"I couldn't help wondering if you wrote," said
Ashenden, with an eagerly timid smile.
</p>

<p>
It was clear that he had not learnt that 'oasis of peace
in a war-weary world' at the shipping-office.
</p>

<p>
"You see, I married a German lady," said Caypor
gravely.
</p>

<p>
"Oh, really?"
</p>

<p>
"I don't think anyone could be more patriotic than I
am.  I'm English through and through and I don't mind
telling you that in my opinion the British Empire is the
greatest instrument for good that the world has ever
seen, but having a German wife I naturally see a good
deal of the reverse of the medal.  You don't have to tell
me that the Germans have faults, but frankly I'm not
prepared to admit that they're devils incarnate.  At the
beginning of the war my poor wife had a very rough
time in England and I for one couldn't have blamed her
if she'd felt rather bitter about it.  Everyone thought she
was a spy.  It'll make you laugh when you know her.
She's the typical German <i>Hausfrau</i> who cares for nothing
but her house and her husband and our only child
Fritzi."  Caypor fondled his dog and gave a little laugh.
"Yes, Fritzi, you are our child, aren't you?  Naturally it
made my position very awkward.  I was connected with
some very important papers, and my editors weren't
quite comfortable about it.  Well, to cut a long story
short, I thought the most dignified course was to resign
and come to a neutral country till the storm blew over.
My wife and I never discuss the war, though I'm bound
to tell you that it's more on my account than hers; she's
much more tolerant than I am and she's more willing
to look upon this terrible business from my point of
view than I am from hers."
</p>

<p>
"That is strange," said Ashenden.  "As a rule women
are so much more rabid than men."
</p>

<p>
"My wife is a very remarkable person.  I should like
to introduce you to her.  By the way, I don't know if
you know my name.  Grantley Caypor."
</p>

<p>
"My name is Somerville," said Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
He told him then of the work he had been doing in the
Censorship Department, and he fancied that into
Caypor's eyes came a certain intentness.  Presently he
told him that he was looking for someone to give him
conversation-lessons in German so that he might rub up
his rusty knowledge of the language; and as he spoke a
notion flashed across his mind: he gave Caypor a look
and saw that the same notion had come to him.  It had
occurred to them at the same instant that it would be a
very good plan for Ashenden's teacher to be Mrs. Caypor.
</p>

<p>
"I asked our landlady if she could find me someone
and she said she thought she could.  I must ask her again.
It ought not to be very hard to find a man who is
prepared to come and talk German to me for an hour a day."
</p>

<p>
"I wouldn't take anyone on the landlady's recommendation,"
said Caypor.  "After all you want someone
with a good North-German accent and she only talks
Swiss.  I'll ask my wife if she knows anyone.  My wife's
a very highly educated woman and you could trust her
recommendation."
</p>

<p>
"That's very kind of you."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden observed Grantley Caypor at his ease.  He
noticed how the small, grey-green eyes, which last night
he had not been able to see, contradicted the red
good-humoured frankness of the face.  They were quick and
shifty, but when the mind behind them was seized by an
unexpected notion they were suddenly still.  It gave one
a peculiar feeling of the working of the brain.  They
were not eyes that inspired confidence; Caypor did that
with his jolly, good-natured smile, the openness of his
broad, weather-beaten face, his comfortable obesity and
the cheeriness of his loud, deep voice.  He was doing his
best now to be agreeable.  While Ashenden talked to
him, a little shyly still but gaining confidence from that
breezy, cordial manner, capable of putting anyone at his
ease, it intrigued him to remember that the man was a
common spy.  It gave a tang to his conversation to reflect
that he had been ready to sell his country for no more
than forty pounds a month.  Ashenden had known
Gomez, the young Spaniard whom Caypor had betrayed.
He was a high-spirited youth, with a love of adventure,
and he had undertaken his dangerous mission not for the
money he earned by it, but from a passion for romance.
It amused him to outwit the clumsy German and it
appealed to his sense of the absurd to play a part in a
shilling shocker.  It was not very nice to think of him
now six feet underground in a prison yard.  He was
young and he had a certain grace of gesture.  Ashenden
wondered whether Caypor had felt a qualm when he
delivered him up to destruction.
</p>

<p>
"I suppose you know a little German?" asked
Caypor, interested in the stranger.
</p>

<p>
"Oh, yes, I was a student in Germany, and I used to
talk it fluently, but that is long ago and I have forgotten.
I can still read it very comfortably."
</p>

<p>
"Oh, yes, I noticed you were reading a German book
last night."
</p>

<p>
Fool!  It was only a little while since he had told
Ashenden that he had not seen him at dinner.  He
wondered whether Caypor had observed the slip.  How
difficult it was never to make one!  Ashenden must be on
his guard; the thing that made him most nervous was the
thought that he might not answer readily enough to his
assumed name of Somerville.  Of course there was
always the chance that Caypor had made the slip on
purpose to see by Ashenden's face whether he noticed
anything.  Caypor got up.
</p>

<p>
"There is my wife.  We go for a walk up one of the
mountains every afternoon.  I can tell you some
charming walks.  The flowers even now are lovely."
</p>

<p>
"I'm afraid I must wait till I'm a bit stronger," said
Ashenden, with a little sigh.
</p>

<p>
He had naturally a pale face and never looked as
robust as he was.  Mrs. Caypor came downstairs and her
husband joined her.  They walked down the road, Fritzi
bounding round them, and Ashenden saw that Caypor
immediately began to speak with volubility.  He was
evidently telling his wife the results of his interview with
Ashenden.  Ashenden looked at the sun shining so gaily
on the lake; the shadow of a breeze fluttered the green
leaves of the trees; everything invited to a stroll: he got
up, went to his room and throwing himself on his bed
had a very pleasant sleep.
</p>

<p>
He went into dinner that evening as the Caypors were
finishing, for he had wandered melancholy about
Lucerne in the hope of finding a cocktail that would
enable him to face the potato salad that he foresaw, and
on their way out of the dining-room Caypor stopped and
asked him if he would drink coffee with them.  When
Ashenden joined them in the hall Caypor got up and
introduced him to his wife.  She bowed stiffly and no
answering smile came to her face to respond to Ashenden's
civil greeting.  It was not hard to see that her
attitude was definitely hostile.  It put Ashenden at his
ease.  She was a plainish woman, nearing forty, with a
muddy skin and vague features; her drab hair was
arranged in a plait round her head like that of Napoleon's
Queen of Prussia; and she was squarely built, plump
rather than fat, and solid.  But she did not look stupid;
she looked, on the contrary, a woman of character and
Ashenden, who had lived enough in Germany to recognise
the type, was ready to believe that though capable
of doing the housework, cooking the dinner and
climbing a mountain, she might be also prodigiously
well-informed.  She wore a white blouse that showed a
sun-burned neck, a black skirt and heavy walking boots.
Caypor addressing her in English told her in his jovial
way, as though she did not know it already, what Ashenden
had told him about himself.  She listened grimly.
</p>

<p>
"I think you told me you understood German," said
Caypor, his big red face wreathed in polite smiles but
his little eyes darting about restlessly.
</p>

<p>
"Yes, I was for some time a student in Heidelberg."
</p>

<p>
"Really?" said Mrs. Caypor in English, an expression
of faint interest for a moment chasing away the sullenness
from her face.  "I know Heidelberg very well.  I
was at school there for one year."
</p>

<p>
Her English was correct, but throaty, and the
mouthing emphasis she gave her words was disagreeable.
Ashenden was diffuse in praise of the old university town
and the beauty of the neighbourhood.  She heard him,
from the standpoint of her Teutonic superiority, with
toleration rather than with enthusiasm.
</p>

<p>
"It is well known that the valley of the Neckar is one
of the beauty places of the whole world," she said.
</p>

<p>
"I have not told you, my dear," said Caypor then,
"that Mr. Somerville is looking for someone to give him
conversation lessons while he is here.  I told him that
perhaps you could suggest a teacher."
</p>

<p>
"No, I know no one whom I could conscientiously
recommend," she answered.  "The Swiss accent is
hateful beyond words.  It could do Mr. Somerville only
harm to converse with a Swiss."
</p>

<p>
"If I were in your place, Mr. Somerville, I would try
and persuade my wife to give you lessons.  She is, if I may
say so, a very cultivated and highly educated woman."
</p>

<p>
"<i>Ach</i>, Grantley, I have not the time.  I have my own
work to do."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden saw that he was being given his opportunity.
The trap was prepared and all he had to do was
to fall in.  He turned to Mrs. Caypor with a manner that
he tried to make shy, deprecating and modest.
</p>

<p>
"Of course it would be too wonderful if you would
give me lessons.  I should look upon it as a real privilege.
Naturally I wouldn't want to interfere with your work.
I am just here to get well, with nothing in the world
to do, and I would suit my time entirely to your
convenience."
</p>

<p>
He felt a flash of satisfaction pass from one to the
other and in Mrs. Caypor's blue eyes he fancied that he
saw a dark glow.
</p>

<p>
"Of course it would be a purely business arrangement,"
said Caypor.  "There's no reason that my good
wife shouldn't earn a little pin-money.  Would you
think ten francs an hour too much?"
</p>

<p>
"No," said Ashenden, "I should think myself lucky
to get a first-rate teacher for that."
</p>

<p>
"What do you say, my dear?  Surely you can spare an
hour, and you would be doing this gentleman a kindness.
He would learn that all Germans are not the devilish
fiends that they think them in England."
</p>

<p>
On Mrs. Caypor's brow was an uneasy frown and
Ashenden could not but think with apprehension of that
hour's conversation a day that he was going to exchange
with her.  Heaven only knew how he would have
to rack his brain for subjects of discourse with that
heavy and morose woman.  Now she made a visible
effort.
</p>

<p>
"I shall be very pleased to give Mr. Somerville
conversation lessons."
</p>

<p>
"I congratulate you, Mr. Somerville," said Caypor
noisily.  "You're in for a treat.  When will you start,
to-morrow at eleven?"
</p>

<p>
"That would suit me very well if it suits Mrs. Caypor."
</p>

<p>
"Yes, that is as good an hour as another," she
answered.
</p>

<p>
Ashenden left them to discuss the happy outcome of
their diplomacy.  But when, punctually at eleven next
morning, he heard a knock at his door (for it had been
arranged that Mrs. Caypor should give him his lesson
in his room) it was not without trepidation that he
opened it.  It behoved him to be frank, a trifle
indiscreet, but obviously wary of a German woman,
sufficiently intelligent, and impulsive.  Mrs. Caypor's
face was dark and sulky.  She plainly hated having
anything to do with him.  But they sat down and she began,
somewhat peremptorily, to ask him questions about his
knowledge of German literature.  She corrected his
mistakes with exactness and when he put before her
some difficulty in German construction explained it
with clearness and precision.  It was obvious that
though she hated giving him a lesson she meant to give
it conscientiously.  She seemed to have not only an
aptitude for teaching, but a love of it, and as the hour
went on she began to speak with greater earnestness.
It was already only by an effort that she remembered
that he was a brutal Englishman.  Ashenden, noticing
the unconscious struggle within her, found himself not
a little entertained; and it was with truth that, when later
in the day Caypor asked him how the lesson had gone,
he answered that it was highly satisfactory; Mrs. Caypor
was an excellent teacher and a most interesting
person.
</p>

<p>
"I told you so.  She's the most remarkable woman I know."
</p>

<p>
And Ashenden had a feeling that when in his hearty,
laughing way Caypor said this he was for the first time
entirely sincere.
</p>

<p>
In a day or two Ashenden guessed that Mrs. Caypor
was giving him lessons only in order to enable Caypor to
arrive at a closer intimacy with him, for she confined
herself strictly to matters of literature, music and
painting; and when Ashenden, by way of experiment,
brought the conversation round to the war, she cut him
short.
</p>

<p>
"I think that is a topic that we had better avoid, Herr
Somerville," she said.
</p>

<p>
She continued to give her lessons with the greatest
thoroughness, and he had his money's worth, but every
day she came with the same sullen face and it was only in
the interest of teaching that she lost for a moment her
instinctive dislike of him.  Ashenden exercised in turn,
but in vain, all his wiles.  He was ingratiating, ingenuous,
humble, grateful, flattering, simple and timid.  She
remained coldly hostile.  She was a fanatic.  Her
patriotism was aggressive, but disinterested, and
obsessed with the notion of the superiority of all things
German, she loathed England with a virulent hatred
because in that country she saw the chief obstacle to
their diffusion.  Her ideal was a German world in which
the rest of the nations under a hegemony greater than
that of Rome should enjoy the benefits of German
science and German art and German culture.  There
was in the conception a magnificent impudence that
appealed to Ashenden's sense of humour.  She was no
fool.  She had read much, in several languages, and she
could talk of the books she had read with good sense.
She had a knowledge of modern painting and modern
music that not a little impressed Ashenden.  It was
amusing once to hear her before luncheon play one of
those silvery little pieces of Debussy; she played it
disdainfully because it was French and so light, but with
an angry appreciation of its grace and gaiety.  When
Ashenden congratulated her she shrugged her shoulders.
</p>

<p>
"The decadent music of a decadent nation," she said.
Then with powerful hands she struck the first resounding
chords of a sonata by Beethoven; but she stopped.
"I cannot play, I am out of practice, and you English,
what do you know of music?  You have not produced a
composer since Purcell!"
</p>

<p>
"What do you think of that statement?" Ashenden,
smiling, asked Caypor who was standing near.
</p>

<p>
"I confess its truth.  The little I know of music my
wife taught me.  I wish you could hear her play when
she is in practice."  He put his fat hand, with its square,
stumpy fingers, on her shoulder.  "She can wring your
heart-strings with pure beauty."
</p>

<p>
"<i>Dummer Kerl</i>," she said, in a soft voice, "Stupid
fellow," and Ashenden saw her mouth for a moment
quiver, but she quickly recovered.  "You English, you
cannot paint, you cannot model, you cannot write music."
</p>

<p>
"Some of us can at times write pleasing verses,"
said Ashenden, with good humour, for it was not his
business to be put out, and, he did not know why, two
lines occurring to him he said them:
</p>

<p>
  "Whither, O splendid ship, thy white sails crowding,<br />
  Leaning across the bosom of the urgent West."<br />
</p>

<p>
</p>

<p>
"Yes," said Mrs. Caypor, with a strange gesture,
"you can write poetry.  I wonder why."
</p>

<p>
And to Ashenden's surprise she went on, in her
guttural English, to recite the next two lines of the
poem he had quoted.
</p>

<p>
"Come, Grantley, <i>Mittagessen</i> is ready, let us go into
the dining-room."
</p>

<p>
They left Ashenden reflective.
</p>

<p>
Ashenden admired goodness, but was not outraged
by wickedness.  People sometimes thought him heartless
because he was more often interested in others than
attached to them, and even in the few to whom he was
attached his eyes saw with equal clearness the merits and
the defects.  When he liked people it was not because he
was blind to their faults; he did not mind their faults, but
accepted them with a tolerant shrug of the shoulders, or
because he ascribed to them excellencies that they did
not possess; and since he judged his friends with candour
they never disappointed him and so he seldom lost one.
He asked from none more than he could give.  He was
able to pursue his study of the Caypors without
prejudice and without passion.  Mrs. Caypor seemed to
him more of a piece and therefore the easier of the two
to understand; she obviously detested him; though it
was so necessary for her to be civil to him her antipathy
was strong enough to wring from her now and then an
expression of rudeness; and had she been safely able to
do so she would have killed him without a qualm.  But
in the pressure of Caypor's chubby hand on his wife's
shoulder and in the fugitive trembling of her lips
Ashenden had divined that this unprepossessing woman
and that mean fat man were joined together by a deep
and sincere love.  It was touching.  Ashenden assembled
the observations that he had been making for the past
few days and little things that he had noticed but to
which he had attached no significance returned to him.
It seemed to him that Mrs. Caypor loved her husband
because she was of a stronger character than he and
because she felt his dependence on her; she loved him
for his admiration of her, and you might guess that till
she met him this dumpy, plain woman with her dullness,
good sense and want of humour could not have much
enjoyed the admiration of men; she enjoyed his heartiness
and his noisy jokes, and his high spirits stirred her
sluggish blood; he was a great big bouncing boy and he
would never be anything else and she felt like a mother
towards him; she had made him what he was, and he was
her man and she was his woman, and she loved him,
notwithstanding his weakness (for with her clear head
she must always have been conscious of that), she loved
him&mdash;<i>ach! was</i>&mdash;as Isolde loved Tristan.  But then there
was the espionage.  Even Ashenden with all his tolerance
for human frailty could not but feel that to betray
your country for money is not a very pretty proceeding.
Of course she knew of it, indeed it was probably
through her that Caypor had first been approached; he
would never have undertaken such work if she had not
urged him to it.  She loved him and she was an honest
and an upright woman.  By what devious means had she
persuaded herself to force her husband to adopt so base
and dishonourable a calling?  Ashenden lost himself in
a labyrinth of conjecture as he tried to piece together the
actions of her mind.
</p>

<p>
Grantley Caypor was another story.  There was little
to admire in him, but at that moment Ashenden was not
looking for an object of admiration; but there was much
that was singular and much that was unexpected in that
gross and vulgar fellow.  Ashenden watched with
entertainment the suave manner in which the spy tried
to inveigle him in his toils.  It was a couple of days after
his first lesson that Caypor, after dinner, his wife having
gone upstairs, threw himself heavily into a chair by
Ashenden's side.  His faithful Fritzi came up to him and
put his long muzzle with its black nose on his knee.
</p>

<p>
"He has no brain," said Caypor, "but a heart of gold.
Look at those little pink eyes.  Did you ever see
anything so stupid?  And what an ugly face, but what
incredible charm!"
</p>

<p>
"Have you had him long?" asked Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"I got him in 1914, just before the outbreak of war.
By the way, what do you think of the news to-day?  Of
course my wife and I never discuss the war.  You can't
think what a relief to me it is to find a fellow-countryman
to whom I can open my heart."
</p>

<p>
He handed Ashenden a cheap Swiss cigar and Ashenden,
making a rueful sacrifice to duty, accepted it.
</p>

<p>
"Of course they haven't got a chance, the Germans,"
said Caypor, "not a dog's chance.  I knew they were
beaten the moment we came in."
</p>

<p>
His manner was earnest, sincere and confidential.
Ashenden made a commonplace rejoinder.
</p>

<p>
"It's the greatest grief of my life that owing to my
wife's nationality I was unable to do any war work.  I
tried to enlist the day war broke out, but they wouldn't
have me on account of my age, but I don't mind telling
you, if the war goes on much longer, wife or no wife,
I'm going to do something.  With my knowledge of
languages I ought to be of some service in the Censorship
Department.  That's where you were, wasn't it?"
</p>

<p>
That was the mark at which he had been aiming and
in answer now to his well-directed questions Ashenden
gave him the information that he had already prepared.
Caypor drew his chair a little nearer and dropped his
voice.
</p>

<p>
"I'm sure you wouldn't tell me anything that anyone
shouldn't know, but after all these Swiss are absolutely
pro-German and we don't want to give anyone the
chance of overhearing."
</p>

<p>
Then he went on another tack.  He told Ashenden a
number of things that were of a certain secrecy.
</p>

<p>
"I wouldn't tell this to anybody else, you know, but I
have one or two friends who are in pretty influential
positions, and they know they can trust me."
</p>

<p>
Thus encouraged Ashenden was a little more deliberately
indiscreet and when they parted both had reason to
be satisfied.  Ashenden guessed that Caypor's typewriter
would be kept busy next morning and that extremely
energetic Major in Berne would shortly receive a most
interesting report.
</p>

<p>
One evening, going upstairs after dinner, Ashenden
passed an open bathroom.  He caught sight of the Caypors.
</p>

<p>
"Come in," cried Caypor in his cordial way.  "We're
washing our Fritzi."
</p>

<p>
The bull-terrier was constantly getting himself very
dirty, and it was Caypor's pride to see him clean and
white.  Ashenden went in.  Mrs. Caypor with her sleeves
turned up and a large white apron was standing at one
end of the bath, while Caypor, in a pair of trousers and a
singlet, his fat, freckled arms bare, was soaping the
wretched hound.
</p>

<p>
"We have to do it at night," he said, "because the
Fitzgeralds use this bath and they'd have a fit if they
knew we washed the dog in it.  We wait till they go to
bed.  Come along, Fritzi, show the gentleman how
beautifully you behave when you have your face
scrubbed."
</p>

<p>
The poor brute, woebegone but faintly wagging his
tail to show that however foul was this operation
performed on him he bore no malice to the god who
did it, was standing in the middle of the bath in six
inches of water.  He was soaped all over and Caypor,
talking the while, shampooed him with his great fat
hands.
</p>

<p>
"Oh, what a beautiful dog he's going to be when he's
as white as the driven snow.  His master will be as
proud as Punch to walk out with him and all the little
lady-dogs will say: good gracious, who's that beautiful
aristocratic-looking bull-terrier walking as though he
owned the whole of Switzerland?  Now stand still while
you have your ears washed.  You couldn't bear to go
out into the street with dirty ears, could you? like a nasty
little Swiss schoolboy.  <i>Noblesse oblige</i>.  Now the black
nose.  Oh, and all the soap is going into his little pink
eyes and they'll smart."
</p>

<p>
Mrs. Caypor listened to this nonsense with a
good-humoured sluggish smile on her broad, plain face, and
presently gravely took a towel.
</p>

<p>
"Now he's going to have a ducking.  Upsie-daisy."
</p>

<p>
Caypor seized the dog by the fore-legs and ducked
him once and ducked him twice.  There was a struggle,
a flurry and a splashing.  Caypor lifted him out of the
bath.
</p>

<p>
"Now go to mother and she'll dry you."
</p>

<p>
Mrs. Caypor sat down and taking the dog between
her strong legs rubbed him till the sweat poured off her
forehead.  And Fritzi, a little shaken and breathless, but
happy it was all over, stood, with his sweet stupid face,
white and shining.
</p>

<p>
"Blood will tell," cried Caypor exultantly.  "He
knows the names of no less than sixty-four of his
ancestors, and they were all nobly born."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden was faintly troubled.  He shivered a little
as he walked upstairs.
</p>

<p>
Then, one Sunday, Caypor told him that he and his
wife were going on an excursion and would eat their
luncheon at some little mountain restaurant; and he
suggested that Ashenden, each paying his share, should
come with them.  After three weeks at Lucerne
Ashenden thought that his strength would permit him to
venture the exertion.  They started early, Mrs. Caypor
businesslike in her walking boots and Tyrolese hat and
alpenstock, and Caypor in stockings and plus-fours
looking very British.  The situation amused Ashenden
and he was prepared to enjoy his day; but he meant to
keep his eyes open; it was not inconceivable that the
Caypors had discovered what he was and it would not do
to go too near a precipice; Mrs. Caypor would not
hesitate to give him a push and Caypor for all his
jolliness was an ugly customer.  But on the face of it
there was nothing to mar Ashenden's pleasure in the
golden morning.  The air was fragrant.  Caypor was full
of conversation.  He told funny stories.  He was gay and
jovial.  The sweat rolled off his great red face and he
laughed at himself because he was so fat.  To Ashenden's
astonishment he showed a peculiar knowledge of
the mountain flowers.  Once he went out of the
way to pick one he saw a little distance from the
path and brought it back to his wife.  He looked at it
tenderly.
</p>

<p>
"Isn't it lovely?" he cried, and his shifty grey-green
eyes for a moment were as candid as a child's.  "It's like
a poem by Walter Savage Landor."
</p>

<p>
"Botany is my husband's favourite science," said
Mrs. Caypor.  "I laugh at him sometimes.  He is
devoted to flowers.  Often when we have hardly had
enough money to pay the butcher he has spent everything
in his pocket to bring me a bunch of roses."
</p>

<p>
"<i>Qui fleurit sa maison fleurit son coeur</i>," said Grantley
Caypor.
</p>

<p>
Ashenden had once or twice seen Caypor, coming in
from a walk, offer Mrs. Fitzgerald a nosegay of
mountain flowers with an elephantine courtesy that was not
entirely displeasing; and what he had just learned added
a certain significance to the pretty little action.  His
passion for flowers was genuine and when he gave them
to the old Irish lady he gave her something he valued.
It showed a real kindness of heart.  Ashenden had
always thought botany a tedious science, but Caypor,
talking exuberantly as they walked along, was able
to impart to it life and interest.  He must have given
it a good deal of study.
</p>

<p>
"I've never written a book," he said.  "There are too
many books already and any desire to write I have is
satisfied by the more immediately profitable and quite
ephemeral composition of an article for a daily paper.
But if I stay here much longer I have half a mind to
write a book about the wild flowers of Switzerland.
Oh, I wish you'd been here a little earlier.  They were
marvellous.  But one wants to be a poet for that, and
I'm only a poor newspaper man."
</p>

<p>
It was curious to observe how he was able to combine
real emotion with false fact.
</p>

<p>
When they reached the inn, with its view of the
mountains and the lake, it was good to see the sensual
pleasure with which he poured down his throat a bottle
of ice-cold beer.  You could not but feel sympathy for a
man who took so much delight in simple things.  They
lunched deliciously off scrambled eggs and mountain
trout.  Even Mrs. Caypor was moved to an unwonted
gentleness by her surroundings; the inn was in an
agreeably rural spot, it looked like a picture of a Swiss
chalet in a book of early nineteenth-century travels; and
she treated Ashenden with something less than her
usual hostility.  When they arrived she had burst into
loud German exclamations on the beauty of the scene,
and now, softened perhaps too by food and drink, her
eyes, dwelling on the grandeur before her, filled with
tears.  She stretched out her hand.
</p>

<p>
"It is dreadful and I am ashamed, notwithstanding
this horrible and unjust war I can feel in my heart at the
moment nothing but happiness and gratitude."
</p>

<p>
Caypor took her hand and pressed it and, an unusual
thing with him, addressing her in German, called her
little pet-names.  It was absurd, but touching.  Ashenden,
leaving them to their emotions, strolled through
the garden and sat down on a bench that had been
prepared for the comfort of the tourist.  The view was of
course spectacular, but it captured you; it was like a
piece of music that was obvious and meretricious, but
for the moment shattered your self-control.
</p>

<p>
And as Ashenden lingered idly in that spot he
pondered over the mystery of Grantley Caypor's
treachery.  If he liked strange people he had found in
him one who was strange beyond belief.  It would be
foolish to deny that he had amiable traits.  His joviality
was not assumed, he was without pretence a hearty
fellow, and he had real good nature.  He was always
ready to do a kindness.  Ashenden had often watched
him with the old Irish Colonel and his wife who were
the only other residents of the hotel; he would listen
good-humouredly to the old man's tedious stories of the
Egyptian war, and he was charming with her.  Now that
Ashenden had arrived at terms of some familiarity with
Caypor he found that he regarded him less with
repulsion than with curiosity.  He did not think that he
had become a spy merely for the money; he was a man of
modest tastes and what he had earned in a shipping-office
must have sufficed to so good a manager as Mrs. Caypor;
and after war was declared there was no lack of
remunerative work for men over the military age.  It
might be that he was one of those men who prefer
devious ways to straight for some intricate pleasure they
get in fooling their fellows; and that he had turned spy,
not from hatred of the country that had imprisoned
him, not even from love of his wife, but from a desire to
score off the big-wigs who never even knew of his
existence.  It might be that it was vanity that impelled
him, a feeling that his talents had not received the
recognition they merited, or just a puckish, impish
desire to do mischief.  He was a crook.  It is true that
only two cases of dishonesty had been brought home to
him, but if he had been caught twice it might be
surmised that he had often been dishonest without being
caught.  What did Mrs. Caypor think of this?  They
were so united that she must be aware of it.  Did it make
her ashamed, for her own uprightness surely none could
doubt, or did she accept it as an inevitable kink in the
man she loved?  Did she do all she could to prevent it or
did she close her eyes to something she could not help?
</p>

<p>
How much easier life would be if people were all
black or all white and how much simpler it would be to
act in regard to them!  Was Caypor a good man who
loved evil or a bad man who loved good?  And how
could such unreconcilable elements exist side by side
and in harmony within the same heart?  For one thing
was clear, Caypor was disturbed by no gnawing of
conscience; he did his mean and despicable work with
gusto.  He was a traitor who enjoyed his treachery.
Though Ashenden had been studying human nature
more or less consciously all his life, it seemed to him
that he knew as little about it now in middle age as he
had done when he was a child.  Of course R. would have
said to him: why the devil do you waste your time with
such nonsense?  The man's a dangerous spy and your
business is to lay him by the heels.
</p>

<p>
That was true enough.  Ashenden had decided that it
would be useless to attempt to make any arrangement
with Caypor.  Though doubtless he would have no
feeling about betraying his employers he could certainly
not be trusted.  His wife's influence was too strong.
Besides, notwithstanding what he had from time to time
told Ashenden, he was in his heart convinced that the
Central Powers must win the war, and he meant to be on
the winning side.  Well, then Caypor must be laid by the
heels, but how he was to effect that Ashenden had no
notion.  Suddenly he heard a voice.
</p>

<p>
"There you are.  We've been wondering where you
had hidden yourself."
</p>

<p>
He looked round and saw the Caypors strolling
towards him.  They were walking hand in hand.
</p>

<p>
"So this is what has kept you so quiet," said Caypor
as his eyes fell on the view.  "What a spot!"
</p>

<p>
Mrs. Caypor clasped her hands.
</p>

<p>
"<i>Ach Gott, wie schön!</i>" she cried.  "<i>Wie schön</i>.  When I
look at that blue lake and those snowy mountains I feel
inclined, like Goethe's Faust, to cry to the passing
moment: tarry."
</p>

<p>
"This is better than being in England with the
excursions and alarums of war, isn't it?" said Caypor.
</p>

<p>
"Much," said Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"By the way, did you have any difficulty in getting out?"
</p>

<p>
"No, not the smallest."
</p>

<p>
"I'm told they make rather a nuisance of themselves
at the frontier nowadays."
</p>

<p>
"I came through without the smallest difficulty.  I
don't fancy they bother much about the English.  I
thought the examination of passports was quite
perfunctory."
</p>

<p>
A fleeting glance passed between Caypor and his wife.
Ashenden wondered what it meant.  It would be
strange if Caypor's thoughts were occupied with the
chances of a journey to England at the very moment
when he was himself reflecting on its possibility.  In a
little while Mrs. Caypor suggested that they had better
be starting back and they wandered together in the
shade of trees down the mountain paths.
</p>

<p>
Ashenden was watchful.  He could do nothing (and
his inactivity irked him) but wait with his eyes open to
seize the opportunity that might present itself.  A
couple of days later an incident occurred that made him
certain something was in the wind.  In the course of his
morning lesson Mrs. Caypor remarked:
</p>

<p>
"My husband has gone to Geneva to-day.  He had
some business to do there."
</p>

<p>
"Oh," said Ashenden, "will he be gone long?"
</p>

<p>
"No, only two days."
</p>

<p>
It is not everyone who can tell a lie and Ashenden had
the feeling, he hardly knew why, that Mrs. Caypor was
telling one then.  Her manner perhaps was not quite as
indifferent as you would have expected when she was
mentioning a fact that could be of no interest to
Ashenden.  It flashed across his mind that Caypor had been
summoned to Berne to see the redoubtable head of the
German secret service.  When he had the chance he said
casually to the waitress:
</p>

<p>
"A little less work for you to do, <i>Fräulein</i>.  I hear that
Herr Caypor has gone to Berne."
</p>

<p>
"Yes.  But he'll be back to-morrow."
</p>

<p>
That proved nothing, but it was something to go
upon.  Ashenden knew in Lucerne a Swiss who was
willing on emergency to do odd jobs and, looking him up,
asked him to take a letter to Berne.  It might be possible
to pick up Caypor and trace his movements.  Next day
Caypor appeared once more with his wife at the dinner-table,
but merely nodded to Ashenden and afterwards
both went straight upstairs.  They looked troubled.
Caypor, as a rule so animated, walked with bowed
shoulders and looked neither to the right nor to the left.
Next morning Ashenden received a reply to his letter:
Caypor had seen Major von P.  It was possible to guess
what the Major had said to him.  Ashenden well knew
how rough he could be; he was a hard man and a brutal,
clever and unscrupulous, and he was not accustomed to
mince his words.  They were tired of paying Caypor a
salary to sit still in Lucerne and do nothing; the time
was come for him to go to England.  Guess-work?  Of
course it was guess-work, but in that trade it mostly
was; you had to deduce the animal from its jaw-bone.
Ashenden knew from Gustav that the Germans wanted
to send someone to England.  He drew a long breath; if
Caypor went he would have to get busy.
</p>

<p>
When Mrs. Caypor came in to give him his lesson she
was dull and listless.  She looked tired and her mouth
was set obstinately.  It occurred to Ashenden that the
Caypors had spent most of the night talking.  He
wished he knew what they had said.  Did she urge him
to go or did she try to dissuade him?  Ashenden watched
them again at luncheon.  Something was the matter, for
they hardly spoke to one another and as a rule they
found plenty to talk about.  They left the room early, but
when Ashenden went out he saw Caypor sitting in the
hall by himself.
</p>

<p>
"Hulloa," he cried jovially, but surely the effort was
patent, "how are you getting on?  I've been to Geneva."
</p>

<p>
"So I heard," said Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"Come and have your coffee with me.  My poor
wife's got a headache.  I told her she'd better go and lie
down."  In his shifty green eyes was an expression that
Ashenden could not read.  "The fact is, she's rather
worried, poor dear; I'm thinking of going to England."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden's heart gave a sudden leap against his ribs,
but his face remained impassive:
</p>

<p>
"Oh, are you going for long?  We shall miss you."
</p>

<p>
"To tell you the truth, I'm fed up with doing nothing.
The war looks as though it were going on for years and
I can't sit here indefinitely.  Besides, I can't afford it, I've
got to earn my living.  I may have a German wife, but I
am an Englishman, hang it all, and I want to do my bit.
I could never face my friends again if I just stayed here
in ease and comfort till the end of the war and never
attempted to do a thing to help the country.  My wife
takes her German point of view and I don't mind telling
you that she's a bit upset.  You know what women are."
</p>

<p>
Now Ashenden knew what it was that he saw in
Caypor's eyes.  Fear.  It gave him a nasty turn.  Caypor
didn't want to go to England, he wanted to stay safely in
Switzerland; Ashenden knew now what the major had
said to him when he went to see him in Berne.  He had
got to go or lose his salary.  What was it that his wife
had said when he told her what had happened?  He had
wanted her to press him to stay, but, it was plain, she
hadn't done that; perhaps he had not dared tell her how
frightened he was; to her he had always been gay, bold,
adventurous and devil-may-care; and now, the prisoner
of his own lies, he had not found it in him to confess
himself the mean and sneaking coward he was.
</p>

<p>
"Are you going to take your wife with you?" asked
Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"No, she'll stay here."
</p>

<p>
It had been arranged very neatly.  Mrs. Caypor would
receive his letters and forward the information they
contained to Berne.
</p>

<p>
"I've been out of England so long that I don't quite
know how to set about getting war-work.  What would
you do in my place?"
</p>

<p>
"I don't know; what sort of work are you thinking of?"
</p>

<p>
"Well, you know, I imagine I could do the same
thing as you did.  I wonder if there's anyone in the
Censorship Department that you could give me a letter
of introduction to."
</p>

<p>
It was only by a miracle that Ashenden saved himself
from showing by a smothered cry or by a broken
gesture how startled he was; but not by Caypor's
request, by what had just dawned upon him.  What an
idiot he had been!  He had been disturbed by the
thought that he was wasting his time at Lucerne, he was
doing nothing, and though in fact, as it turned out,
Caypor was going to England it was due to no cleverness
of his.  He could take to himself no credit for the
result.  And now he saw that he had been put in Lucerne,
told how to describe himself and given the proper
information, so that what actually had occurred should
occur.  It would be a wonderful thing for the German
secret service to get an agent into the Censorship
Department; and by a happy accident there was Grantley
Caypor, the very man for the job, on friendly terms with
someone who had worked there.  What a bit of luck!
Major von P. was a man of culture and, rubbing his
hands, he must surely have murmured: <i>stultum facit
fortuna quem vult perdere</i>.  It was a trap of that devilish
R. and the grim major at Berne had fallen into it.  Ashenden
had done his work just by sitting still and doing
nothing.  He almost laughed as he thought what a fool
R. had made of him.
</p>

<p>
"I was on very good terms with the chief of my
department, I could give you a note to him if you
liked."
</p>

<p>
"That would be just the thing."
</p>

<p>
"But of course I must give the facts.  I must say I've
met you here and only known you a fortnight."
</p>

<p>
"Of course.  But you'll say what else you can for me,
won't you?"
</p>

<p>
"Oh, certainly."
</p>

<p>
"I don't know yet if I can get a visa.  I'm told they're
rather fussy."
</p>

<p>
"I don't see why.  I shall be very sick if they refuse
me one when I want to go back."
</p>

<p>
"I'll go and see how my wife is getting on," said
Caypor suddenly, getting up.  "When will you let me
have that letter?"
</p>

<p>
"Whenever you like.  Are you going at once?"
</p>

<p>
"As soon as possible."
</p>

<p>
Caypor left him.  Ashenden waited in the hall for a
quarter of an hour so that there should appear in him no
sign of hurry.  Then he went upstairs and prepared
various communications.  In one he informed R. that
Caypor was going to England; in another he made
arrangements through Berne that wherever Caypor
applied for a visa it should be granted to him without
question; and these he despatched forthwith.  When he
went down to dinner he handed Caypor a cordial letter
of introduction.
</p>

<p>
Next day but one Caypor left Lucerne.
</p>

<p>
Ashenden waited.  He continued to have his hour's
lesson with Mrs. Caypor and under her conscientious
tuition began now to speak German with ease.  They
talked of Goethe and Winckelmann, of art and life and
travel.  Fritzi sat quietly by her chair.
</p>

<p>
"He misses his master," she said, pulling his ears.
"He only really cares for him, he suffers me only as
belonging to him."
</p>

<p>
After his lesson Ashenden went every morning to
Cook's to ask for his letters.  It was here that all
communications were addressed to him.  He could not move
till he received instructions, but R. could be trusted not
to leave him idle long; and meanwhile there was nothing
for him to do but have patience.  Presently he received a
letter from the consul in Geneva to say that Caypor had
there applied for his visa and had set out for France.
Having read this Ashenden went on for a little stroll by
the lake and on his way back happened to see Mrs. Caypor
coming out of Cook's office.  He guessed that
she was having her letters addressed there too.  He went
up to her.
</p>

<p>
"Have you had news of Herr Caypor?" he asked her.
</p>

<p>
"No," she said.  "I suppose I could hardly expect to yet."
</p>

<p>
He walked along by her side.  She was disappointed,
but not yet anxious; she knew how irregular at that time
was the post.  But next day during the lesson he could
not but see that she was impatient to have done with it.
The post was delivered at noon and at five minutes to
she looked at her watch and him.  Though Ashenden
knew very well that no letter would ever come for her
he had not the heart to keep her on tenter-hooks.
</p>

<p>
"Don't you think that's enough for the day?  I'm sure
you want to go down to Cook's," he said.
</p>

<p>
"Thank you.  That is very amiable of you."
</p>

<p>
When a little later he went there himself he found her
standing in the middle of the office.  Her face was
distraught.  She addressed him wildly.
</p>

<p>
"My husband promised to write from Paris.  I am
sure there is a letter for me, but these stupid people say
there's nothing.  They're so careless, it's a scandal."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden did not know what to say.  While the clerk
was looking through the bundle to see if there was
anything for him she came up to the desk again.
</p>

<p>
"When does the next post come in from France?"
she asked.
</p>

<p>
"Sometimes there are letters about five."
</p>

<p>
"I'll come then."
</p>

<p>
She turned and walked rapidly away.  Fritzi followed
her with his tail between his legs.  There was no doubt
of it, already the fear had seized her that something was
wrong.  Next morning she looked dreadful; she could
not have closed her eyes all night; and in the middle of
the lesson she started up from her chair.
</p>

<p>
"You must excuse me, Herr Somerville, I cannot give
you a lesson to-day, I am not feeling well."
</p>

<p>
Before Ashenden could say anything she had flung
nervously from the room, and in the evening he got
a note from her to say that she regretted that she must
discontinue giving him conversation lessons.  She gave
no reason.  Then Ashenden saw no more of her; she
ceased coming in to meals; except to go morning and
afternoon to Cook's she spent apparently the whole day
in her room.  Ashenden thought of her sitting there hour
after hour with that hideous fear gnawing at her heart.
Who could help feeling sorry for her?  The time hung
heavy on his hands too.  He read a good deal and wrote a
little, he hired a canoe and went for long leisurely
paddles on the lake; and at last one morning the clerk at
Cook's handed him a letter.  It was from R.  It had all
the appearance of a business communication, but
between the lines he read a good deal.
</p>

<p>
<i>Dear Sir</i>, it began, <i>The goods, with accompanying letter,
despatched by you from Lucerne have been duly delivered.  We
are obliged to you for executing our instructions with such
promptness</i>.
</p>

<p>
It went on in this strain.  R. was exultant.  Ashenden
guessed that Caypor had been arrested and by now had
paid the penalty of his crime.  He shuddered.  He
remembered a dreadful scene.  Dawn.  A cold, grey
dawn, with a drizzling rain falling.  A man, blindfolded,
standing against a wall, an officer very pale
giving an order, a volley, and then a young soldier, one
of the firing-party, turning round and holding on to his
gun for support, vomiting.  The officer turned paler
still, and he, Ashenden, feeling dreadfully faint.  How
terrified Caypor must have been!  It was awful when the
tears ran down their faces.  Ashenden shook himself.
He went to the ticket-office and obedient to his orders
bought himself a ticket for Geneva.
</p>

<p>
As he was waiting for his change Mrs. Caypor came
in.  He was shocked at the sight of her.  She was blowsy
and dishevelled and there were heavy rings round her
eyes.  She was deathly pale.  She staggered up to the
desk and asked for a letter.  The clerk shook his head.
</p>

<p>
"I'm sorry, madam, there's nothing yet."
</p>

<p>
"But look, look.  Are you sure?  Please look again."
</p>

<p>
The misery in her voice was heart-rending.  The clerk
with a shrug of the shoulders took out the letters from a
pigeon-hole and sorted them once more.
</p>

<p>
"No, there's nothing, madam."
</p>

<p>
She gave a hoarse cry of despair and her face was
distorted with anguish.
</p>

<p>
"Oh, God, oh, God," she moaned.
</p>

<p>
She turned away, the tears streaming from her weary
eyes, and for a moment she stood there like a blind man
groping and not knowing which way to go.  Then a
fearful thing happened, Fritzi, the bull-terrier, sat down
on his haunches and threw back his head and gave a
long, long melancholy howl.  Mrs. Caypor looked at
him with terror; her eyes seemed really to start from her
head.  The doubt, the gnawing doubt that had tortured
her during those dreadful days of suspense, was a doubt
no longer.  She knew.  She staggered blindly into the
street.
</p>

<p><br /><br /><br /></p>

<p><a id="chap11"></a></p>

<h3>
XI
<br /><br />
<i>Behind the Scenes</i>
</h3>

<p>
When Ashenden was sent to X and looked
about him he could not but see that his
situation was equivocal.  X was the capital
of an important belligerent state; but a state
divided against itself; there was a large party antagonistic
to the war and revolution was possible if not imminent.
Ashenden was instructed to see what under the
circumstances could best be done; he was to suggest a policy
and, if it was approved by the exalted personages who
had sent him, to carry it out.  A vast amount of money
was put at his disposal.  The ambassadors of Great
Britain and the United States had been directed to afford
him such facilities as were at their command, but
Ashenden had been told privately to keep himself to
himself; he was not to make difficulties for the official
representatives of the two powers by divulging to them
facts that it might be inconvenient for them to know;
and since it might be necessary for him to give support
under cover to a party that was at daggers drawn with
that in office and with which the relations of the United
States and Great Britain were extremely cordial it was
just as well that Ashenden should keep his own counsel.
The exalted personages did not wish the ambassadors to
suffer the affront of discovering that an obscure agent
had been sent to work at cross-purposes with them.  On
the other hand it was thought just as well to have a
representative in the opposite camp, who in the event
of a sudden upheaval would be at hand with adequate
funds and in the confidence of the new leaders of the
country.
</p>

<p>
But ambassadors are sticklers for their dignity and
they have a keen nose to scent any encroachment on
their authority.  When Ashenden on his arrival at X paid
an official call on Sir Herbert Witherspoon, the British
ambassador, he was received with a politeness to which
no exception could be taken, but with a frigidity that
would have sent a little shiver down the spine of a polar
bear.  Sir Herbert was a diplomat <i>de carrière</i> and he
cultivated the manner of his profession to a degree that
filled the observer with admiration.  He did not ask
Ashenden anything about his mission because he knew
that Ashenden would reply evasively, but he allowed
him to see that it was a perfectly foolish one.  He talked
with acidulous tolerance of the exalted personages who
had sent Ashenden to X.  He told Ashenden that he had
instructions to meet any demands for help that he made
and stated that if Ashenden at any time desired to see
him he had only to say so.
</p>

<p>
"I have received the somewhat singular request to
despatch telegrams for you in a private code which I
understand has been given to you and to hand over to
you telegrams in code as they arrive."
</p>

<p>
"I hope they will be few and far between, sir,"
answered Ashenden.  "I know nothing so tedious as
coding and decoding."
</p>

<p>
Sir Herbert paused for an instant.  Perhaps that was
not quite the answer he expected.  He rose.
</p>

<p>
"If you will come into the Chancellery I will introduce
you to the Counsellor and to the Secretary to
whom you can take your telegrams."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden followed him out of the room, and after
handing him over to the Counsellor the ambassador
gave him a limp hand to shake.
</p>

<p>
"I hope I shall have the pleasure of seeing you again
one of these days," he said, and with a curt nod left him.
</p>

<p>
Ashenden bore his reception with composure.  It was
his business to remain in obscurity and he did not wish
any official attentions to attract notice to him.  But when
on the afternoon of the same day he made his call at the
American Embassy he discovered why Sir Herbert
Witherspoon had shown him so much coldness.  The
American ambassador was Mr. Wilbur Schäfer; he
came from Kansas City and had been given his post
when few suspected that a war was on the point of breaking
out, as a reward for political services.  He was a big
stout man, no longer young, for his hair was white, but
well-preserved and exceedingly robust.  He had a
square, red face, clean-shaven, with a little snub nose
and a determined chin.  His face was very mobile and he
twisted it continually into odd and amusing grimaces.
It looked as though it were made out of the red
india-rubber from which they make hot-water bottles.  He
greeted Ashenden with cordiality.  He was a hearty
fellow.
</p>

<p>
"I suppose you've seen Sir Herbert.  I reckon you've
got his dander up.  What do they mean in Washington
and London by telling us to despatch your code
telegrams without knowing what they're all about?
You know, they've got no right to do that."
</p>

<p>
"Oh, Your Excellency, I think it was only done to
save time and trouble," said Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"Well, what is this mission anyway?"
</p>

<p>
This of course was a question that Ashenden was not
prepared to answer, but not thinking it politic to say so,
he determined to give a reply from which the ambassador
could learn little.  He had already made up his mind
from the look of him that Mr. Schäfer, though doubtless
possessed of the gifts that enable a man to swing a
presidential election this way or that, had not, at least
nakedly for all men to see, the acuteness that his position
perhaps demanded.  He gave you the impression of a
bluff, good-humoured creature who liked good cheer.
Ashenden would have been wary when playing poker
with him, but where the matter in hand was concerned
felt himself fairly safe.  He began to talk in a loose, vague
way of the world at large and before he had gone far
managed to ask the ambassador his opinion of the
general situation.  It was the sound of the trumpet to the
war-horse: Mr. Schäfer made him a speech that lasted
without a break for twenty-five minutes, and when at
last he stopped in exhaustion, Ashenden with warm
thanks for his friendly reception was able to take his
leave.
</p>

<p>
Making up his mind to give both the ambassadors a
wide berth, he set about his work and presently devised
a plan of campaign.  But by chance he was able to do Sir
Herbert Witherspoon a good turn and so was thrown
again into contact with him.  It has been suggested that
Mr. Schäfer was more of a politician than a diplomat,
and it was his position rather than his personality that
gave weight to his opinions.  He looked upon the
eminence to which he had risen as an opportunity to
enjoy the good things of life and his enthusiasm led him
to lengths that his constitution could ill support.  His
ignorance of foreign affairs would in any case have made
his judgment of doubtful value, but his state at meetings
of the allied ambassadors so often approached the
comatose that he seemed hardly capable of forming a
judgment at all.  He was known to have succumbed to
the fascination of a Swedish lady of undoubted beauty,
but of antecedents that from the point of view of a
secret service agent were suspect.  Her relations with
Germany were such as to make her sympathy with the
Allies dubious.  Mr. Schäfer saw her every day and was
certainly much under her influence.  Now it was noticed
that there was from time to time a leakage of very secret
information and the question arose whether Mr. Schäfer
did not in these daily interviews inadvertently say things
that were promptly passed on to the headquarters of the
enemy.  No one could have doubted Mr. Schäfer's
honesty and patriotism, but it was permissible to be
uncertain of his discretion.  It was an awkward matter to
deal with, but the concern was as great in Washington as
in London and Paris, and Ashenden was instructed to
deal with it.  He had of course not been sent to X
without help to do the work he was expected to do, and
among his assistants was an astute, powerful and
determined man, a Galician Pole, named Herbartus.  After
consultation with him it happened by one of those
fortunate coincidences that occasionally come about in
the secret service that a maid in the service of the
Swedish lady fell ill and in her place the countess (for
such she was) was very luckily able to engage an
extremely respectable person from the neighbourhood
of Cracow.  The fact that before the war she had been
secretary to an eminent scientist made her doubtless no
less competent a housemaid.
</p>

<p>
The result of this was that Ashenden received every
two or three days a neat report upon the goings-on at
this charming lady's apartment, and though he learned
nothing that could confirm the vague suspicions that
had arisen he learned something else of no little
importance.  From conversations held at the cosy little
<i>tête-à-tête</i> dinners that the countess gave the ambassador it
appeared that his excellency was harbouring a bitter
grievance against his English colleague.  He complained
that the relations between himself and Sir Herbert were
deliberately maintained on a purely official level.  In his
blunt way he said he was sick of the frills that damned
Britisher put on.  He was a he-man and a hundred-per-cent
American and he had no more use for protocol and
etiquette than for a snowball in hell.  Why didn't they
get together, like a couple of regular fellows, and have a
good old crack?  Blood was thicker than water, he'd say
and they'd do more towards winning the war by sitting
down in their shirt-sleeves and talking things out over a
bottle of rye than by all their diplomacy and white spats.
Now it was obviously very undesirable that there should
not exist between the two ambassadors a perfect
cordiality, so Ashenden thought it well to ask Sir
Herbert whether he might see him.
</p>

<p>
He was ushered into Sir Herbert's library.
</p>

<p>
"Well, Mr. Ashenden, what can I do for you?  I hope
you're quite satisfied with everything.  I understand that
you've been keeping the telegraph lines busy."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden, as he sat down, gave the ambassador a
glance.  He was beautifully dressed in a perfectly cut
tail-coat that fitted his slim figure like a glove, in his black
silk tie was a handsome pearl, there was a perfect line in
his grey trousers, with their quiet and distinguished
stripe, and his neat, pointed shoes looked as though he
had never worn them before.  You could hardly imagine
him sitting in his shirt-sleeves over a whisky high-ball.
He was a tall, thin man, with exactly the figure to show
off modern clothes, and he sat in his chair, rather
upright, as though he were sitting for an official portrait.
In his cold and uninteresting way he was really a very
handsome fellow.  His neat grey hair was parted on one
side, his pale face was clean-shaven, he had a delicate,
straight nose and grey eyes under grey eyebrows, his
mouth in youth might have been sensual and well-shaped,
but now it was set to an expression of sarcastic
determination and the lips were pallid.  It was the kind
of face that suggested centuries of good breeding, but
you could not believe it capable of expressing emotion.
You would never expect to see it break into the hearty
distortion of laughter, but at the most be for a moment
frigidly moved by an ironic smile.
</p>

<p>
Ashenden was uncommonly nervous.
</p>

<p>
"I'm afraid you'll think I'm meddling in what doesn't
concern me, sir.  I'm quite prepared to be told to mind
my own business."
</p>

<p>
"We'll see.  Pray go on."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden told his story and the ambassador listened
attentively.  He did not turn his cold, grey eyes from
Ashenden's face, and Ashenden knew that his
embarrassment was obvious.
</p>

<p>
"How did you find out all this?"
</p>

<p>
"I have means of getting hold of little bits of
information that are sometimes useful," said Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"I see."
</p>

<p>
Sir Herbert maintained his steady gaze, but Ashenden
was surprised to see on a sudden in the steely eyes a
little smile.  The bleak, supercilious face became for an
instant quite attractive.
</p>

<p>
"There is another little bit of information that
perhaps you'd be good enough to give me.  What does
one do to be a regular fellow?"
</p>

<p>
"I am afraid one can do nothing, Your Excellency,"
replied Ashenden gravely.  "I think it is a gift of God."
</p>

<p>
The light vanished from Sir Herbert's eyes, but his
manner was slightly more urbane than when Ashenden
was brought into the room.  He rose and held out his
hand.
</p>

<p>
"You did quite right to come and tell me this,
Mr. Ashenden.  I have been very remiss.  It is inexcusable on
my part to offend that inoffensive old gentleman.  But I
will do my best to repair my error.  I will call at the
American Embassy this afternoon."
</p>

<p>
"But not in too great state, sir, if I may venture a
suggestion."
</p>

<p>
The ambassador's eyes twinkled.  Ashenden began to
think him almost human.
</p>

<p>
"I can do nothing but in state, Mr. Ashenden.  That is
one of the misfortunes of my temperament."  Then as
Ashenden was leaving he added: "Oh, by the way, I
wonder if you'd care to come to dinner with me
tomorrow night.  Black tie.  At eight-fifteen."
</p>

<p>
He did not wait for Ashenden's assent, but took it for
granted, and with a nod of dismissal sat down once
more at his great writing-table.
</p>

<p><br /><br /><br /></p>

<p><a id="chap12"></a></p>

<h3>
XII
<br /><br />
<i>His Excellency</i>
</h3>

<p>
Ashenden looked forward with misgiving
to the dinner to which Sir Herbert
Witherspoon had invited him.  The black tie
suggested a small party, perhaps only Lady Anne, the
ambassador's wife, whom Ashenden did not know, or
one or two young secretaries.  It did not presage a
hilarious evening.  It was possible that they might play
bridge after dinner, but Ashenden knew that
professional diplomats do not play bridge with skill: it may
be supposed that they find it difficult to bend their great
minds to the triviality of a parlour game.  On the other
hand he was interested to see a little more of the
ambassador in circumstances of less formality.  For it
was evident that Sir Herbert Witherspoon was not an
ordinary person.  He was in appearance and manner a
perfect specimen of his class and it is always entertaining
to come upon good examples of a well-known type.  He
was exactly what you expected an ambassador to be.  If
any of his characteristics had been ever so slightly
exaggerated he would have been a caricature.  He
escaped being ridiculous only by a hair's breadth and
you watched him with a kind of breathlessness as you
might watch a tight-rope dancer doing perilous feats at a
dizzy height.  He was certainly a man of character.  His
rise in the diplomatic service had been rapid and though
doubtless it had helped him to be connected by marriage
with powerful families his rise had been due chiefly to
his merit.  He knew how to be determined when
determination was necessary and conciliatory when
conciliation was opportune.  His manners were perfect;
he could speak half a dozen languages with ease and
accuracy; he had a clear and logical brain.  He was never
afraid to think out his thoughts to the end, but was wise
enough to suit his actions to the exigencies of the
situation.  He had reached his post at X at the early age
of fifty-three and had borne himself in the exceedingly
difficult conditions created by the war and contending
parties within the state with tact, confidence and once at
least with courage.  For on one occasion a riot having
arisen a band of revolutionaries forced their way into the
British Embassy and Sir Herbert from the head of his
stairs had harangued them and notwithstanding
revolvers flourished at him had persuaded them to go to
their homes.  He would end his career in Paris.  That
was evident.  He was a man whom you could not but
admire but whom it was not easy to like.  He was a
diplomat of the school of those Victorian ambassadors
to whom could confidently be entrusted great affairs and
whose self-reliance, sometimes it must be admitted
tinctured with arrogance, was justified by its results.
</p>

<p>
When Ashenden drove up to the doors of the
Embassy they were flung open and he was received by a
stout and dignified English butler and three footmen.
He was ushered up that magnificent flight of stairs on
which had taken place the dramatic incident just related
and shown into an immense room, dimly lit with shaded
lamps, in which at the first glance he caught sight of
large pieces of stately furniture and over the
chimney-piece an immense portrait in coronation robes of King
George IV.  But there was a bright fire blazing on the
hearth and from a deep sofa by the side of it his host, as
his name was announced, slowly rose.  Sir Herbert
looked very elegant as he came towards him.  He wore
his dinner-jacket, the most difficult costume for a man to
look well in, with incredible distinction.
</p>

<p>
"My wife has gone to a concert, but she'll come in
later.  She wants to make your acquaintance.  I haven't
asked anybody else.  I thought I would give myself the
pleasure of enjoying your company <i>en tête-à-tête</i>."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden murmured a civil rejoinder, but his heart
sank.  He wondered how he was going to pass at least a
couple of hours alone with this man who made him, he
was bound to confess, feel extremely shy.
</p>

<p>
The door was opened again and the butler and a
footman entered bearing very heavy silver salvers.
</p>

<p>
"I always have a glass of sherry before my dinner,"
said the ambassador, "but in case you have acquired the
barbarous custom of drinking cocktails I can offer you
what I believe is called a dry Martini."
</p>

<p>
Shy though he might be Ashenden was not going to
give in to this sort of thing with complete lameness.
</p>

<p>
"I move with the times," he replied.  "To drink a
glass of sherry when you can get a dry Martini is like
taking a stage-coach when you can travel by the Orient
Express."
</p>

<p>
A little desultory conversation after this fashion was
interrupted by the throwing open of two great doors
and the announcement that His Excellency's dinner was
served.  They went into the dining-room.  This was a
vast apartment in which sixty people might have
comfortably dined, but there was now only a small
round table in it so that Sir Herbert and Ashenden sat
intimately.  There was an immense mahogany sideboard
on which were massive pieces of gold plate, and above
it, facing Ashenden, was a fine picture by Canaletto.
Over the chimney-piece was a three-quarter length
portrait of Queen Victoria as a girl with a little gold
crown on her small, prim head.  Dinner was served by
the corpulent butler and the three very tall English
footmen.  Ashenden had the impression that the
ambassador enjoyed in his well-bred way the sensation of
ignoring the pomp in which he lived.  They might have
been dining in one of the great country houses of
England; it was a ceremony they performed, sumptuous
without ostentation, and it was saved from a trifling
absurdity only because it was in a tradition; but the
experience gained for Ashenden a kind of savour from
the thought that dwelt with him that on the other side of
the wall was a restless, turbulent population that might
at any moment break into bloody revolution, while not
two hundred miles away men in the trenches were
sheltering in their dug-outs from the bitter cold and the
pitiless bombardment.
</p>

<p>
Ashenden need not have feared that the conversation
would proceed with difficulty and the notion he had had
that Sir Herbert had asked him in order to question him
about his secret mission was quickly dispelled.  The
ambassador behaved to him as though he were a
travelling Englishman who had presented a letter of
introduction and to whom he desired to show civility.  You
would hardly have thought that a war was raging, for he
made to it only such references as showed that he was
not deliberately avoiding a distressing subject.  He spoke
of art and literature, proving himself to be a diligent
reader of catholic taste, and when Ashenden talked to
him, from personal acquaintance, of the writers whom
Sir Herbert knew only through their works, he listened
with the friendly condescension which the great ones of
the earth affect towards the artist.  (Sometimes,
however, they paint a picture or write a book, and then the
artist gets a little of his own back.)  He mentioned in
passing a character in one of Ashenden's novels, but did
not make any other reference to the fact that his guest
was a writer.  Ashenden admired his urbanity.  He
disliked people to talk to him of his books, in which indeed,
once written, he took small interest, and it made him
self-conscious to be praised or blamed to his face.  Sir
Herbert Witherspoon flattered his self-esteem, by
showing that he had read him, but spared his delicacy by
withholding his opinion of what he had read.  He spoke
too of the various countries in which during his career
he had been stationed and of various persons, in London
and elsewhere, that he and Ashenden knew in common.
He talked well, not without a pleasant irony that might
very well have passed for humour, and intelligently.
Ashenden did not find his dinner dull, but neither did he
find it exhilarating.  He would have been more interested
if the ambassador had not so invariably said the right,
wise and sensible thing upon every topic that was
introduced.  Ashenden was finding it something of an effort
to keep up with this distinction of mind and he would
have liked the conversation to get into its shirt-sleeves,
so to speak, and put its feet on the table.  But of this
there was no chance and Ashenden once or twice caught
himself wondering how soon after dinner he could
decently take his leave.  At eleven he had an
appointment with Herbartus at the Hôtel de Paris.
</p>

<p>
The dinner came to an end and coffee was brought in.
Sir Herbert knew good food and good wine and
Ashenden was obliged to admit that he had fared
excellently.  Liqueurs were served with the coffee, and
Ashenden took a glass of brandy.
</p>

<p>
"I have some very old Benedictine," said the
ambassador.  "Won't you try it?"
</p>

<p>
"To tell you the honest truth I think brandy is the
only liqueur worth drinking."
</p>

<p>
"I'm not sure that I don't agree with you.  But in that
case I must give you something better than that."
</p>

<p>
He gave an order to the butler who presently brought
in a cobwebbed bottle and two enormous glasses.
</p>

<p>
"I don't really want to boast," said the ambassador as
he watched the butler pour the golden liquid into
Ashenden's glass, "but I venture to think that if you like
brandy you'll like this.  I got it when I was Counsellor
for a short time in Paris."
</p>

<p>
"I've had a good deal to do lately with one of your
successors then."
</p>

<p>
"Byring?"
</p>

<p>
"Yes."
</p>

<p>
"What do you think of the brandy?"
</p>

<p>
"I think it's marvellous."
</p>

<p>
"And of Byring?"
</p>

<p>
The question came so oddly on the top of the other
that it sounded faintly comic.
</p>

<p>
"Oh, I think he's a damned fool."
</p>

<p>
Sir Herbert leaned back in his chair, holding the huge
glass with both hands in order to bring out the aroma,
and looked slowly round the stately and spacious room.
The table had been cleared of superfluous things.  There
was a bowl of roses between Ashenden and his host.
The servants switched off the electric light as they finally
left the room and it was lit now only by the candles that
were on the table and by the fire.  Notwithstanding its
size it had an air of sober comfort.  The ambassador's
eyes rested on the really distinguished portrait of Queen
Victoria that hung over the chimneypiece.
</p>

<p>
"I wonder," he said at last.
</p>

<p>
"He'll have to leave the diplomatic service."
</p>

<p>
"I'm afraid so."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden gave him a quick glance of enquiry.  He
was the last man from whom he would have expected
sympathy for Byring.
</p>

<p>
"Yes, in the circumstances," he proceeded, "I
suppose it's inevitable that he should leave the service.
I'm sorry.  He's an able fellow and he'll be missed.  I
think he had a career before him."
</p>

<p>
"Yes, that is what I've heard.  I'm told that at the
P.O. they thought very highly of him."
</p>

<p>
"He has many of the gifts that are useful in this rather
dreary trade," said the ambassador, with a slight smile,
in his cold and judicial manner.  "He's handsome, he's a
gentleman, he has nice manners, he speaks excellent
French and he has a good head on his shoulders.  He'd
have done well."
</p>

<p>
"It seems a pity that he should waste such golden
opportunities."
</p>

<p>
"I understand he's going into the wine business at the
end of the war.  Oddly enough he's going to represent
the very firm from whom I got this brandy."
</p>

<p>
Sir Herbert raised the glass to his nose and inhaled the
fragrance.  Then he looked at Ashenden.  He had a way
of looking at people, when he was thinking of something
else perhaps, that suggested that he thought them
somewhat peculiar but rather disgusting insects.
</p>

<p>
"Have you ever seen the woman?" he asked.
</p>

<p>
"I dined with her and Byring at Larue's."
</p>

<p>
"How very interesting.  What is she like?"
</p>

<p>
"Charming."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden tried to describe her to his host, but
meanwhile with another part of his mind he recollected the
impression she had made on him at the restaurant when
Byring had introduced him to her.  He had been not a
little interested to meet a woman of whom for some
years he had heard so much.  She called herself Rose
Auburn, but what her real name was few knew.  She had
gone to Paris originally as one of a troupe of dancers,
called the Glad Girls, who performed at the Moulin
Rouge, but her astonishing beauty had soon caused her
to be noticed and a wealthy French manufacturer fell in
love with her.  He gave her a house and loaded her with
jewels, but could not long meet the demands she made
upon him, and she passed in rapid succession from lover
to lover.  She became in a short time the best known
courtesan in France.  Her expenditure was prodigal and
she ruined her admirers with cynical unconcern.  The
richest men found themselves unable to cope with her
extravagance.  Ashenden, before the war, had seen her
once at Monte Carlo lose a hundred and eighty thousand
francs at a sitting and that then was an important sum.
She sat at the big table, surrounded by curious onlookers
throwing down packets of thousand-franc notes with a
self-possession that would have been admirable if it had
been her own money that she was losing.
</p>

<p>
When Ashenden met her she had been leading this
riotous life, dancing and gambling all night, racing most
afternoons a week, for twelve or thirteen years and she
was no longer very young; but there was hardly a line on
that lovely brow, scarcely a crow's-foot round those
liquid eyes, to betray the fact.  The most astonishing
thing about her was that notwithstanding this feverish
and unending round of senseless debauchery she had
preserved an air of virginity.  Of course she cultivated
the type.  She had an exquisitely graceful and slender
figure, and her innumerable frocks were always made
with a perfect simplicity.  Her brown hair was very
plainly done.  With her oval face, charming little nose
and large blue eyes she had all the air of one or other of
Anthony Trollope's charming heroines.  It was the
keepsake style raised to such rareness that it made you
catch your breath.  She had a lovely skin, very white and
red, and if she painted it was not from necessity but from
wantonness.  She irradiated a sort of dewy innocence
that was as attractive as it was unexpected.
</p>

<p>
Ashenden had heard of course that Byring for a year
or more had been her lover.  Her notoriety was such that
a hard light of publicity was shed on everyone with
whom she had any affair, but in this instance the gossips
had more to say than usual because Byring had no money
to speak of and Rose Auburn had never been known to
grant her favours for anything that did not in some way
represent hard cash.  Was it possible that she loved him?
It seemed incredible and yet what other explanation was
there?  Byring was a young man with whom any woman
might have fallen in love.  He was somewhere in the
thirties, very tall and good-looking with a singular
charm of manner and of an appearance so debonair that
people turned round in the street to look at him; but
unlike most handsome men he seemed entirely unaware
of the impression he created.  When it became known
that Byring was the <i>amant de coeur</i> (a prettier phrase than
our English 'fancy man') of this famous harlot he became
an object of admiration to many women and of envy to
many men; but when a rumour spread abroad that he
was going to marry her consternation seized his friends
and ribald laughter everyone else.  It became known that
Byring's chief had asked him if it was true and he had
admitted it.  Pressure was put upon him to relinquish a
plan that could only end in disaster.  It was pointed out
to him that the wife of a diplomat has social obligations
that Rose Auburn could not fulfil.  Byring replied that
he was prepared to resign his post whenever by so doing
he would not cause inconvenience.  He brushed aside
every expostulation and every argument; he was
determined to marry.
</p>

<p>
When first Ashenden met Byring he did not very much
take to him.  He found him slightly aloof.  But as the
hazards of his work brought him from time to time into
contact with him he discerned that the distant manner
was due merely to shyness and as he came to know him
better he was charmed by the uncommon sweetness of
his disposition.  Their relations, however, remained
purely official, so that it was a trifle unexpected when
Byring one day asked him to dinner to meet Miss
Auburn, and he could not but wonder whether it was
because already people were beginning to turn the
cold shoulder on him.  When he went he discovered that
the invitation was due to the lady's curiosity.  But the
surprise he got on learning that she had found time to
read (with admiration, it appeared) two or three of his
novels was not the only surprise he got that evening.
Leading on the whole a quiet and studious life he had
never had occasion to penetrate into the world of the
higher prostitution and the great courtesans of the
period were known to him only by name.  It was
somewhat astonishing to Ashenden to discover that Rose
Auburn differed so little in air and manner from the
smart women of Mayfair with whom through his books
he had become more or less intimately acquainted.  She
was perhaps a little more anxious to please (indeed one of
her agreeable traits was the interest she took in
whomever she was talking to), but she was certainly no more
made-up and her conversation was as intelligent.  It
lacked only the coarseness that society has lately affected.
Perhaps she felt instinctively that those lovely lips
should never disfigure themselves with foul words;
perhaps only she was at heart still a trifle suburban.  It
was evident that she and Byring were madly in love
with one another.  It was really moving to see their
mutual passion.  When Ashenden took his leave of
them, as he shook hands with her (and she held his hand
a moment and with her blue, starry eyes looked into his)
she said to him:
</p>

<p>
"You will come and see us when we're settled in
London, won't you?  You know we're going to be
married."
</p>

<p>
"I heartily congratulate you," said Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"And him?" she smiled, and her smile was like an
angel's; it had the freshness of dawn and the tender
rapture of a southern spring.
</p>

<p>
"Have you never looked at yourself in the glass?"
</p>

<p>
Sir Herbert Witherspoon watched him intently while
Ashenden (he thought not without a trace of humour)
described the dinner-party.  No flicker of a smile
brightened his cold eyes.
</p>

<p>
"Do you think it'll be a success?" he asked now.
</p>

<p>
"No."
</p>

<p>
"Why not?"
</p>

<p>
The question took Ashenden aback.
</p>

<p>
"A man not only marries his wife, he marries her
friends.  Do you realise the sort of people Byring will
have to mix with, painted women of tarnished
reputation and men who've gone down in the social scale,
parasites and adventurers?  Of course they'll have
money, her pearls must be worth a hundred thousand
pounds, and they'll be able to cut a dash in the smart
Bohemia of London.  Do you know the gold fringe of
society?  When a woman of bad character marries she
earns the admiration of her set, she has worked the
trick, she's caught a man and become respectable, but
he, the man, only earns its ridicule.  Even her own
friends, the old hags with their gigolos and the abject
men who earn a shabby living by introducing the
unwary to tradesmen on a ten per cent commission, even
they despise him.  He is the mug.  Believe me, to
conduct yourself gracefully in such a position you need
either great dignity of character or an unparalleled
effrontery.  Besides, do you think there's a chance of its
lasting?  Can a woman who's led that wild career settle
down to domestic life?  In a little while she'll grow
bored and restless.  And how long does love last?
Don't you think Byring's reflections will be bitter when,
caring for her no longer, he compares what he is with
what he might have been?"
</p>

<p>
Witherspoon helped himself to another drop of his
old brandy.  Then he looked up at Ashenden with a
curious expression.
</p>

<p>
"I'm not sure if a man isn't wiser to do what he wants
very much to do and let the consequences take care of
themselves."
</p>

<p>
"It must be very pleasant to be an ambassador," said
Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
Sir Herbert smiled thinly.
</p>

<p>
"Byring rather reminds me of a fellow I knew when I
was a very junior clerk at the P.O.  I won't tell you his
name because he's by way of being very well-known
now and highly respected.  He's made a great success of
his career.  There is always something a little absurd in
success."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden slightly raised his eyebrows at this
statement, somewhat unexpected in the mouth of Sir
Herbert Witherspoon, but did not say anything.
</p>

<p>
"He was one of my fellow clerks.  He was a brilliant
creature, I don't think anyone ever denied that, and
everyone prophesied from the beginning that he would
go far.  I venture to say that he had pretty well all the
qualifications necessary for a diplomatic career.  He was
of a family of soldiers and sailors, nothing very grand,
but eminently respectable, and he knew how to behave
in the great world without bumptiousness or timidity.
He was well-read.  He took an interest in painting.  I
dare say he made himself a trifle ridiculous; he wanted to
be in the movement, he was very anxious to be modern,
and at a time when little was known of Gauguin and
Cézanne he raved over their pictures.  There was perhaps
a certain snobbishness in his attitude, a desire to shock
and astonish the conventional, but at heart his
admiration of the arts was genuine and sincere.  He adored
Paris and whenever he had the chance ran over and put
up at a little hotel in the Latin Quarter, where he could
rub shoulders with painters and writers.  As is the habit
with gentry of that sort they patronised him a little
because he was nothing but a diplomat and laughed at
him a little because he was evidently a gentleman.  But
they liked him because he was always ready to listen
to their speeches, and when he praised their works they
were even willing to admit that, though a Philistine, he
had a certain instinct for the Right Stuff."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden noted the sarcasm and smiled at the fling
at his own profession.  He wondered what this long
description was leading to.  The ambassador seemed
to linger over it partly because he liked it, but also
because for some reason he hesitated to come to the
point.
</p>

<p>
"But my friend was modest.  He enjoyed himself
enormously and he listened open-mouthed when these
young painters and unknown scribblers tore to pieces
established reputations and talked with enthusiasm of
persons of whom the sober but cultured secretaries in
Downing Street had never even heard.  At the back of
his mind he knew that they were rather a common,
second-rate lot, and when he went back to his work in
London it was with no regret, but with the feeling that
he had been witnessing an odd and diverting play; now
the curtain had fallen he was quite ready to go home.
I haven't told you that he was ambitious.  He knew
that his friends expected him to do considerable things
and he had no notion of disappointing them.  He was
perfectly conscious of his abilities.  He meant to succeed.
Unfortunately he was not rich, he had only a few
hundreds a year, but his father and mother were dead
and he had neither brother nor sister.  He was aware
that this freedom from close ties was an asset.  His
opportunity to make connections that would be of use
to him was unrestricted.  Do you think he sounds a
very disagreeable young man?"
</p>

<p>
"No," said Ashenden in answer to the sudden question.
"Most clever young men are aware of their
cleverness, and there is generally a certain cynicism
in their calculations with regard to the future.  Surely
young men should be ambitious."
</p>

<p>
"Well, on one of these little trips to Paris my friend
became acquainted with a talented young Irish painter
called O'Malley.  He's an R.A. now and paints highly
paid portraits of Lord Chancellors and Cabinet
Ministers.  I wonder if you remember one he did of my wife,
which was exhibited a couple of years ago."
</p>

<p>
"No, I don't.  But I know his name."
</p>

<p>
"My wife was delighted with it.  His art always seems
to me very refined and agreeable.  He's able to put on
canvas the distinction of his sitters in a very remarkable
way.  When he paints a woman of breeding, you know
that it is a woman of breeding and not a trollop."
</p>

<p>
"It is a charming gift," said Ashenden.  "Can he also
paint a slut and make her look like one?"
</p>

<p>
"He could.  Now doubtless he would scarcely wish
to.  He was living then in a small and dirty studio in
the rue du Cherche-Midi with a little Frenchwoman
of the character you describe and he painted several
portraits of her which were extremely like."
</p>

<p>
It seemed to Ashenden that Sir Herbert was going
into somewhat excessive detail, and he asked himself
whether the friend of whom he was telling a story that
till now seemed to lead no-whither was in point of fact
himself.  He began to give it more of his attention.
</p>

<p>
"My friend liked O'Malley.  He was good company,
the type of the agreeable rattle, and he had a truly Irish
gift of the gab.  He talked incessantly and in my friend's
opinion brilliantly.  He found it very amusing to go
and sit in the studio while O'Malley was painting and
listen to him chattering away about the technique of
his art.  O'Malley was always saying that he would
paint a portrait of him and his vanity was tickled.
O'Malley thought him&mdash;far from plain and said it
would do him good to exhibit the portrait of someone
who at least looked like a gentleman."
</p>

<p>
"By the way, when was all this?" asked Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"Oh, thirty years ago....  They used to talk of
their future and when O'Malley said the portrait he was
going to paint of my friend would look very well in
the National Portrait Gallery, my friend had small doubt
in the back of his mind, whatever he modestly said,
that it would eventually find its way there.  One evening
when my friend&mdash;shall we call him Brown?&mdash;was
sitting in the studio and O'Malley, desperately taking
advantage of the last light of day, was trying to get
finished for the Salon that portrait of his mistress which
is now in the Tate Gallery, O'Malley asked him if he
would like to come and dine with them.  He was
expecting a friend of hers, she was called Yvonne by
the way, and he would be glad if Brown would make
a fourth.  This friend of Yvonne's was an acrobat and
O'Malley was anxious to get her to pose for him in the
nude.  Yvonne said she had a marvellous figure.  She
had seen O'Malley's work and was willing enough to
sit and dinner was to be devoted to settling the matter.
She was not performing then, but was about to open
at the Gaîtés Montparnasses and with her days free
was not disinclined to oblige a friend and earn a little
money.  The notion amused Brown, who had never
met an acrobat, and he accepted.  Yvonne suggested
that he might find her to his taste and if he did she
could promise him that he would not find her very
difficult to persuade.  With his grand air and English
clothes she would take him for a <i>milord anglais</i>.  My
friend laughed.  He did not take the suggestion very
seriously.  '<i>On ne sait jamais</i>,' he said.  Yvonne looked at
him with mischievous eyes.  He sat on.  It was Easter
time and cold, but the studio was comfortably warm,
and though it was small and everything was
higgledy-piggledy and the dust lay heavy on the rim of the
window, it was most friendly and cosy.  Brown had a
tiny flat in Waverton Street, in London, with very good
mezzotints on the walls and several pieces of early
Chinese pottery here and there, and he wondered to
himself why his tasteful sitting-room had none of the
comforts of home nor the romance that he found in
that disorderly studio.
</p>

<p>
"Presently there was a ring at the door and Yvonne
ushered in her friend.  Her name, it appeared, was Alix,
and she shook hands with Brown, uttering a stereotyped
phrase, with the mincing politeness of a fat woman in
a bureau de tabac.  She wore a long cloak in imitation
mink and an enormous scarlet hat.  She looked
incredibly vulgar.  She was not even pretty.  She had a
broad flat face, a wide mouth and an upturned nose.
She had a great deal of hair, golden, but obviously dyed,
and large china-blue eyes.  She was heavily made up."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden began to have no doubt that Witherspoon
was narrating an experience of his own, for otherwise
he could never have remembered after thirty years what
hat the young woman wore and what coat, and he was
amused at the ambassador's simplicity in thinking that
so thin a subterfuge could disguise the truth.  Ashenden
could not but guess how the story would end and it
tickled him to think that this cold, distinguished and
exquisite person should ever have had anything like an
adventure.
</p>

<p>
"She began to talk away to Yvonne and my friend
noticed that she had one feature that oddly enough he
found very attractive: she had a deep and husky voice
as though she were just recovering from a bad cold
and, he didn't know why, it seemed to him exceedingly
pleasant to listen to.  He asked O'Malley if that was
her natural voice and O'Malley said she had had it as
long as ever he had known her.  He called it a whisky
voice.  He told her what Brown said about it and she
gave him a smile of her wide mouth and said it wasn't
due to drink, it was due to standing so much on her
head.  That was one of the inconveniences of her
profession.  Then the four of them went to a beastly little
restaurant off the boulevard St. Michel where for two
francs fifty including wine my friend ate a dinner that
seemed to him more delicious than any he had ever
eaten at the Savoy or Claridge's.  Alix was a very chatty
young person and Brown listened with amusement,
with amazement even, while in her rich, throaty voice
she talked of the varied incidents of the day.  She had
a great command of slang and though he could not
understand half of it, he was immensely tickled with its
picturesque vulgarity.  It was pungent of the heated
asphalt, the zinc bars of cheap taverns and racy of the
crowded squares in the poorer districts of Paris.  There
was an energy in those apt and vivid metaphors that
went like champagne to his anæmic head.  She was a
guttersnipe, yes, that's what she was, but she had a
vitality that warmed you like a blazing fire.  He was
conscious that Yvonne had told her that he was an
unattached Englishman, with plenty of money; he saw
the appraising glance she gave him and then, pretending
that he had noticed nothing, he caught the phrase, <i>il
n'est pas mal</i>.  It faintly amused him: he had a notion
himself that he was not so bad.  There were places,
indeed, where they went further than that.  She did not
pay much attention to him, in point of fact they were
talking of things of which he was ignorant and he could
do little more than show an intelligent interest, but
now and again she gave him a long look, passing her
tongue quickly round her lips, that suggested to him
that he only had to ask for her to give.  He shrugged a
mental shoulder.  She looked healthy and young, she
had an agreeable vivacity, but beyond her husky voice
there was nothing particularly attractive in her.  But
the notion of having a little affair in Paris did not
displease him, it was life, and the thought that she was
a music-hall artiste was mildly diverting: in middle age
it would doubtless amuse him to remember that he
had enjoyed the favours of an acrobat.  Was it La
Rochefoucauld or Oscar Wilde who said that you should
commit errors in youth in order to have something to
regret in old age?  At the end of dinner (and they sat
over their coffee and brandy till late), they went out
into the street and Yvonne proposed that he should
take Alix home.  He said he would be delighted.  Alix
said it was not far and they walked.  She told him that
she had a little apartment, of course mostly she was on
tour, but she liked to have a place of her own, a woman,
you know, had to be in her furniture, without that she
received no consideration; and presently they reached
a shabby house in a bedraggled street.  She rang the
bell for the <i>concierge</i> to open the door.  She did not press
him to enter.  He did not know if she looked upon it
as a matter of course.  He was seized with timidity.
He racked his brains, but could not think of a single
thing to say.  Silence fell upon them.  It was absurd.
With a little click the door opened; she looked at him
expectantly; she was puzzled; a wave of shyness swept
over him.  Then she held out her hand, thanked him
for bringing her to the door, and bade him good night.
His heart beat nervously.  If she had asked him to come
in he would have gone.  He wanted some sign that she
would like him to.  He shook her hand, said good
night, raised his hat and walked away.  He felt a perfect
fool.  He could not sleep; he tossed from side to side
of his bed, thinking for what a noodle she must take
him, and he could hardly wait for the day that would
permit him to take steps to efface the contemptible
impression he must have made on her.  His pride was
lacerated.  Wanting to lose no time he went round to
her house at eleven to ask her to lunch with him, but
she was out; he sent round some flowers and later in the
day called again.  She had been in, but was gone out
once more.  He went to see O'Malley on the chance of
finding her, but she was not there, and O'Malley
facetiously asked him how he had fared.  To save his
face he told him that he had come to the conclusion
that she did not mean very much to him and so like a
perfect gentleman he had left her.  But he had an uneasy
feeling that O'Malley saw through his story.  He sent
her a <i>pneumatique</i> asking her to dine with him next day.
She did not answer.  He could not understand it; he
asked the porter of his hotel a dozen times if there was
nothing for him, and at last, almost in desperation, just
before dinner went to her house.  The concierge told him
she was in and he went up.  He was very nervous,
inclined to be angry because she had treated his
invitation so cavalierly, but at the same time anxious to
appear at his ease.  He climbed the four flights of stairs,
dark and smelly, and rang at the door to which he had
been directed.  There was a pause, he heard sounds
within and rang again.  Presently she opened.  He had
an absolute certitude that she did not in the least know
who he was.  He was taken aback, it was a blow to his
vanity; but he assumed a cheerful smile.
</p>

<p>
"'I came to find out if you were going to dine with
me to-night.  I sent you a <i>pneumatique</i>.'
</p>

<p>
"Then she recognised him.  But she stood at the door
and did not ask him in.
</p>

<p>
"'Oh, no, I can't dine with you to-night.  I have
terrible megrim and I am going to bed.  I couldn't
answer your <i>pneumatique</i>, I mislaid it, and I'd forgotten
your name.  Thank you for the flowers.  It was nice
of you to send them."
</p>

<p>
'Then won't you come and dine with me to-morrow
night?'
</p>

<p>
"'<i>Justement</i>, I have an engagement to-morrow night.
I'm sorry.'
</p>

<p>
"There was nothing more to say.  He had not the
nerve to ask her to anything else and so bade her good
night and went.  He had the impression that she was
not vexed with him, but that she had entirely forgotten
him.  It was humiliating.  When he went back to London
without having seen her again, it was with a curious
sense of dissatisfaction.  He was not in the least in love
with her, he was annoyed with her, but he could not
get her quite out of his mind.  He was honest enough
to realise that he was suffering from nothing more than
wounded vanity.
</p>

<p>
"During that dinner at the little restaurant off the
Boul' Mich' she had mentioned that her troupe was
going to London in the spring and in one of his letters
to O'Malley he slipped in casually a phrase to the effect
that if his young friend Alix happened to be coming to
town he (O'Malley) might let him know and he would
look her up.  He would like to hear from her own
ingenuous lips what she thought of the nude O'Malley
had painted of her.  When the painter some time
afterwards wrote and told him that she was appearing a week
later at the Metropolitan in the Edgware Road, he felt
a sudden rush of blood to his head.  He went to see her
play.  If he had not taken the precaution to go earlier in
the day and look at the programme he would have
missed her, for her turn was the first on the list.  There
were two men, a stout one and a thin one, with large
black moustaches, and Alix.  They were dressed in
ill-fitting pink tights with green satin trunks.  The men
did various exercises on twin trapezes while Alix tripped
about the stage, giving them handkerchiefs to wipe their
hands on, and occasionally turned a somersault.  When
the fat man raised the thin one on his shoulders she
climbed up and stood on the shoulders of the second,
kissing her hand to the audience.  They did tricks with
safety bicycles.  There is often grace, and even beauty,
in the performance of clever acrobats, but this one was
so crude, so vulgar that my friend felt positively
embarrassed.  There is something shameful in seeing grown
men publicly make fools of themselves.  Poor Alix, with
a fixed and artificial smile on her lips, in her pink tights
and green satin trunks, was so grotesque that he
wondered how he could have let himself feel a moment's
annoyance because when he went to her apartment she
had not recognised him.  It was with a shrug of the
shoulders, condescendingly, that he went round to the
stage door afterwards and gave the door-keeper a
shilling to take her his card.  In a few minutes she came
out.  She seemed delighted to see him.
</p>

<p>
"'Oh, how good it is to see the face of someone you
know in this sad city,' she said.  'Ah, now you can give
me that dinner you asked me to in Paris.  I'm dying of
hunger.  I never eat before the show.  Imagine that they
should have given us such a bad place on the programme.
It's an insult.  But we shall see the agent to-morrow.  If
they think they can put upon us like that they are
mistaken.  <i>Ah, non, non et non</i>!  And what an audience!  No
enthusiasm, no applause, nothing.'
</p>

<p>
"My friend was staggered.  Was it possible that she
took her performance seriously?  He almost burst out
laughing.  But she still spoke with that throaty voice
that had such a queer effect on his nerves.  She was
dressed all in red and wore the same red hat in which
he had first seen her.  She looked so flashy that he did
not fancy the notion of asking her to a place where he
might be seen and so suggested Soho.  There were
hansoms still in those days and the hansom was more
conducive to love-making, I imagine, than is the taxi of
the present time.  My friend put his arm round Alix's
waist and kissed her.  It left her calm, but on the other
hand did not wildly excite him.  While they ate a late
dinner he made himself very gallant and she played up
to him agreeably; but when they got up to go and he
proposed that she should come round to his rooms in
Waverton Street she told him that a friend had come
over from Paris with her and that she had to meet him
at eleven: she had only been able to dine with Brown
because her companion had a business engagement.
Brown was exasperated, but did not want to show it,
and when, as they walked down Wardour Street (for
she said she wanted to go to the Café Monico), pausing
in front of a pawnbroker's to look at the jewellery in
the window, she went into ecstasies over a bracelet of
sapphires and diamonds that Brown thought incredibly
vulgar, he asked her if she would like it.
</p>

<p>
"'But it's marked fifteen pounds,' she said.
</p>

<p>
"He went in and bought it for her.  She was delighted.
She made him leave her just before they came to
Piccadilly Circus.
</p>

<p>
"'Now listen, <i>mon petit</i>,' she said, 'I cannot see you
in London because of my friend, he is jealous as a wolf,
that is why I think it is more prudent for you to go now,
but I am playing at Boulogne next week, why do you
not come over?  I shall be alone there.  My friend has
to go back to Holland, where he lives.'
</p>

<p>
"'All right,' said Brown, 'I'll come.'
</p>

<p>
"When he went to Boulogne&mdash;he had two days' leave&mdash;it
was with the one idea of salving the wound to his
pride.  It was odd that he should care.  I daresay to you
it seems inexplicable.  He could not bear the notion that
Alix looked upon him as a fool and he felt that when
once he had removed that impression from her he would
never bother about her again.  He thought of O'Malley
too, and of Yvonne.  She must have told them and
it galled him to think that people whom in his heart
he despised should laugh at him behind his back.  Do
you think he was very contemptible?"
</p>

<p>
"Good gracious, no," said Ashenden.  "All sensible
people know that vanity is the most devastating, the
most universal and the most ineradicable of the passions
that afflict the soul of man, and it is only vanity that
makes him deny its power.  It is more consuming than
love.  With advancing years, mercifully, you can snap
your fingers at the terror and the servitude of love, but
age cannot free you from the thraldom of vanity.  Time
can assuage the pangs of love, but only death can still
the anguish of wounded vanity.  Love is simple and
seeks no subterfuge, but vanity cozens you with a
hundred disguises.  It is part and parcel of every virtue:
it is the mainspring of courage and the strength of
ambition; it gives constancy to the lover and endurance
to the stoic; it adds fuel to the fire of the artist's desire
for fame and is at once the support and the compensation
of the honest man's integrity; it leers even cynically in
the humility of the saint.  You cannot escape it, and
should you take pains to guard against it, it will make
use of those very pains to trip you up.  You are defenceless
against its onslaught because you know not on what
unprotected side it will attack you.  Sincerity cannot
protect you from its snare nor humour from its mockery."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden stopped, not because he had said all he had
to say, but because he was out of breath.  He noticed
also that the ambassador, desiring to talk rather than to
listen, heard him with a politeness that was strained.
But he had made this speech not so much for his host's
edification as for his own entertainment.
</p>

<p>
"It is vanity finally that makes man support his
abominable lot."
</p>

<p>
For a minute Sir Herbert was silent.  He looked
straight in front of him as though his thoughts lingered
distressfully on some far horizon of memory.
</p>

<p>
"When my friend came back from Boulogne he knew
that he was madly in love with Alix and he had arranged
to meet her again in a fortnight's time when she would
be performing at Dunkirk.  He thought of nothing else
in the interval and the night before he was to start, he
only had thirty-six hours this time, he could not sleep,
so devouring was the passion that consumed him.  Then
he went over for a night to Paris to see her and once
when she was disengaged for a week he persuaded her
to come to London.  He knew that she did not love him.
He was just a man among a hundred others and she
made no secret of the fact that he was not her only lover.
He suffered agonies of jealousy but knew that it would
only excite her ridicule or her anger if he showed it.  She
had not even a fancy for him.  She liked him because he
was a gentleman and well dressed.  She was quite willing
to be his mistress so long as the claims he made on her
were not irksome.  But that was all.  His means were not
large enough to enable him to make her any serious
offers, but even if they had been, liking her freedom,
she would have refused."
</p>

<p>
"But what about the Dutchman?" asked Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"The Dutchman?  He was a pure invention.  She
made him up on the spur of the moment because for one
reason or another she did not just then want to be
bothered with Brown.  What should one lie more or less
matter to her?  Don't think he didn't struggle against
his passion.  He knew it was madness; he knew that a
permanent connection between them could only lead to
disaster for him.  He had no illusions about her: she was
common, coarse and vulgar.  She could talk of none of
the things that interested him, nor did she try; she took
it for granted that he was concerned with her affairs and
told him interminable stories of her quarrels with fellow
performers, her disputes with managers and her
wrangles with hotel-keepers.  What she said bored him
to death, but the sound of her throaty voice made his
heart beat so that sometimes he thought he would
suffocate."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden sat uneasily in his chair.  It was a Sheraton
chair very good at look at, but hard and straight; and he
wished that Sir Herbert had had the notion of going
back to the other room where there was a comfortable
sofa.  It was quite plain now that the story he was telling
was about himself and Ashenden felt a certain indelicacy
in the man's stripping his soul before him so nakedly.
He did not desire this confidence to be forced upon him.
Sir Herbert Witherspoon meant nothing to him.  By the
light of the shaded candles Ashenden saw that he was
deathly pale and there was a wildness in his eyes that in
that cold and composed man was strangely disconcerting.
He poured himself out a glass of water; his throat
was dry so that he could hardly speak.  But he went on
pitilessly.
</p>

<p>
"At last my friend managed to pull himself together.
He was disgusted by the sordidness of his intrigue; there
was no beauty in it, nothing but shame; and it was
leading to nothing.  His passion was as vulgar as the
woman for whom he felt it.  Now it happened that Alix
was going to spend six months in the North of Africa
with her troupe and for that time at least it would be
impossible for him to see her.  He made up his mind that
he must seize the opportunity and make a definite break.
He knew bitterly that it would mean nothing to her.
In three weeks she would have forgotten him.
</p>

<p>
"And then there was something else.  He had come to
know very well some people, a man and his wife, whose
social and political connections were extremely
important.  They had an only daughter and, I don't know
why, she fell in love with him.  She was everything that
Alix was not, pretty in the real English way, with blue
eyes and pink and white cheeks, tall and fair; she might
have stepped out of one of Du Maurier's pictures in
<i>Punch</i>.  She was clever and well-read, and since she had
lived all her life in political circles she could talk
intelligently of the sort of things that interested him.  He had
reason to believe that if he asked her to marry him she
would accept.  I have told you that he was ambitious.
He knew that he had great abilities and he wanted the
chance to use them.  She was related to some of the
greatest families in England and he would have been a
fool not to realise that a marriage of this kind must make
his path infinitely easier.  The opportunity was golden.
And what a relief to think that he could put behind him
definitely that ugly little episode, and what a happiness,
instead of that wall of cheerful indifference and
matter-of-fact good nature against which in his passion for Alix
he had vainly battered his head, what a happiness to feel
that to someone else he really meant something!  How
could he help being flattered and touched when he saw
her face light up as he came into the room?  He wasn't
in love with her, but he thought her charming, and he
wanted to forget Alix and the vulgar life into which she
had led him.  At last he made up his mind.  He asked her
to marry him and was accepted.  Her family was
delighted.  The marriage was to take place in the autumn,
since her father had to go on some political errand to
South America and was taking his wife and daughter
with him.  They were to be gone the whole summer.
My friend Brown was transferring from the P.O. to
the diplomatic service and had been promised a post at
Lisbon.  He was to go there immediately.
</p>

<p>
"He saw his fiancée off.  Then it happened that owing
to some hitch the man whom Brown was going to replace
was kept at Lisbon three months longer and so for
that period my friend found himself at a loose end.  And
just when he was making up his mind what to do with
himself he received a letter from Alix.  She was coming
back to France and had a tour booked; she gave him a
long list of the places she was going to, and in her
casual, friendly way said that they would have fun if he
could manage to run over for a day or two.  An insane,
a criminal notion seized him.  If she had shown any
eagerness for him to come he might have resisted; it was
her airy, matter-of-fact indifference that took him.  On a
sudden he longed for her.  He did not care if she was
gross and vulgar, he had got her in his bones, and it was
his last chance.  In a little while he was going to be
married.  It was now or never.  He went down to
Marseilles and met her as she stepped off the boat that
had brought her from Tunis.  His heart leaped at the
pleasure she showed on seeing him.  He knew he loved
her madly.  He told her that he was going to be married
in three months and asked her to spend the last of his
freedom with him.  She refused to abandon her tour.
How could she leave her companions in the lurch?  He
offered to compensate them, but she would not hear of
it; they could not find someone to take her place at a
moment's notice, nor could they afford to throw over
a good engagement that might lead to others in the
future; they were honest people, and they kept their
word, they had their duty to their managers and their
duty to their public.  He was exasperated; it seemed
absurd that his whole happiness should be sacrificed to
that wretched tour.  And at the end of the three months?
What was to happen to her then?  Oh, no, he was asking
something that wasn't reasonable.  He told her that he
adored her.  He did not know till then how insanely he
loved her.  Well, then, she said, why did he not come
with her and make the tour with them?  She would be
glad of his company; they could have a good time
together and at the end of three months he could go and
marry his heiress and neither of them would be any the
worse.  For a moment he hesitated, but now that he saw
her again he could not bear the thought of being parted
from her so soon.  He accepted.  And then she said:
</p>

<p>
"'But listen, my little one, you mustn't be silly, you
know.  The managers won't be too pleased with me if I
make a lot of <i>chichi</i>; I have to think of my future, and
they won't be so anxious to have me back if I refuse to
please old customers of the house.  It won't be very
often, but it must be understood that you are not to
make me scenes if now and then I give myself to someone
whose fancy I take.  It will mean nothing, that is
business, you will be my <i>amant de coeur</i>.'
</p>

<p>
"He felt a strange, excruciating pain in his heart, and
I think he went so pale that she thought he was going
to faint.  She looked at him curiously.
</p>

<p>
"'Those are the terms,' she said.  'You can either
take them or leave them.'
</p>

<p>
"He accepted."
</p>

<p>
Sir Herbert Witherspoon leaned forward in his chair
and he was so white that Ashenden thought too that he
was going to faint.  His skin was drawn over his skull so
that his face looked like a death's head, but the veins on
his forehead stood out like knotted cords.  He had lost all
reticence.  And Ashenden once more wished that he
would stop, it made him shy and nervous to see the man's
naked soul: no one has the right to show himself to
another in that destitute state.  He was inclined to cry:
</p>

<p>
"Stop, stop.  You mustn't tell me any more.  You'll
be so ashamed."
</p>

<p>
But the man had lost all shame.
</p>

<p>
"For three months they travelled together from one
dull provincial town to another, sharing a filthy little
bedroom in frowzy hotels; Alix would not let him take
her to good hotels, she said she had not the clothes for
them and she was more comfortable in the sort of hotel
she was used to; she did not want her companions in the
business to say that she was putting on side.  He sat
interminable hours in shabby cafés.  He was treated as a
brother by members of the troupe, they called him by
his Christian name and chaffed him coarsely and slapped
him on the back.  He ran errands for them when they
were busy with their work.  He saw the good-humoured
contempt in the eyes of managers and was obliged to put
up with the familiarity of stage-hands.  They travelled
third-class from place to place and he helped to carry the
luggage.  He with whom reading was a passion never
opened a book because Alix was bored by reading and
thought that anyone who did was just giving himself
airs.  Every night he went to the music-hall and watched
her go through that grotesque and ignoble performance.
He had to fall in with her pathetic fancy that it was
artistic.  He had to congratulate her when it had gone
well and condole with her when some feat of agility had
gone amiss.  When she had finished he went to a café
and waited for her while she changed, and sometimes
she would come in rather hurriedly and say:
</p>

<p>
"'Don't wait for me to-night, <i>mon chou</i>, I'm busy.'
</p>

<p>
"And then he would undergo agonies of jealousy.
He would suffer as he never knew a man could suffer.
She would come back to the hotel at three or four in the
morning.  She wondered why he was not asleep.  Sleep!
How could he sleep with that misery gnawing at his
heart?  He had promised he would not interfere with
her.  He did not keep his promise.  He made her terrific
scenes.  Sometimes he beat her.  Then she would lose
her patience and tell him she was sick of him, she would
pack her things to go, and then he would go grovelling
to her, promising anything, any submission, vowing to
swallow any humiliation, if she would not leave him.
It was horrible and degrading.  He was miserable.
Miserable?  No, he was happier than he'd ever been in
his life.  It was the gutter that he wallowed in, but he
wallowed in it with delight.  Oh, he was so bored with
the life he'd led hitherto, and this one seemed to him
amazing and romantic.  This was reality.  And that
frowzy, ugly woman with the whisky voice, she had such
a splendid vitality, such a zest for life that she seemed
to raise his own to some more vivid level.  It really did
seem to him to burn with a pure, gem-like flame.  Do
people still read Pater?"
</p>

<p>
"I don't know," said Ashenden.  "I don't."
</p>

<p>
"There was only three months of it.  Oh, how short
the time seemed and how quickly the weeks sped by!
Sometimes he had wild dreams of abandoning everything
and throwing in his lot with the acrobats.  They
had come to have quite a liking for him and they said
he could easily train himself to take a part in the turn.
He knew they said it more in jest than in earnest, but
the notion vaguely tickled him.  But these were only
dreams and he knew that nothing would come of them.
He never really chaffered with the thought that when
the three months came to an end he would not return
to his own life with its obligations.  With his mind, that
cold, logical mind of his, he knew it would be absurd to
sacrifice everything for a woman like Alix; he was
ambitious, he wanted power; and besides, he could not
break the heart of that poor child who loved and trusted
him.  She wrote to him once a week.  She was longing
to get back, the time seemed endless to her and he, he
had a secret wish that something would happen to delay
her arrival.  If he could only have a little more time!
Perhaps if he had six months he would have got
over his infatuation.  Already sometimes he hated Alix.
</p>

<p>
"The last day came.  They seemed to have little to say
to one another.  They were both sad; but he knew that
Alix only regretted the breaking of an agreeable habit, in
twenty-four hours she would be as gay and full of spirits
with her stray companion as though he had never
crossed her path; he could only think that next day he
was going to Paris to meet his fiancée and her family.
They spent their last night in one another's arms
weeping.  If she'd asked him then not to leave her it may be
that he would have stayed; but she didn't, it never
occurred to her, she accepted his going as a settled thing,
and she wept not because she loved him, she wept
because he was unhappy.
</p>

<p>
"In the morning she was sleeping so soundly that
he had not the heart to wake her to say good-bye.  He
slipped out very quietly, with his bag in his hand, and
took the train to Paris."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden turned away his head, for he saw two
tears form themselves in Witherspoon's eyes and
roll down his cheeks.  He did not even try to hide
them.  Ashenden lit another cigar.
</p>

<p>
"In Paris they cried out when they saw him.  They
said he looked like a ghost.  He told them he'd been ill
and hadn't said anything about it in order not to worry
them.  They were very kind.  A month later he was
married.  He did very well for himself.  He was given
opportunities to distinguish himself and he distinguished
himself.  His rise was spectacular.  He had the
well-ordered and distinguished establishment that he had
wanted.  He had the power for which he had craved.
He was loaded with honours.  Oh, he made a success of
life and there were hundreds who envied him.  It was
all ashes.  He was bored, bored to distraction, bored by
that distinguished, beautiful lady he had married, bored
by the people his life forced him to live with; it was a
comedy he was playing and sometimes it seemed
intolerable to live for ever and ever behind a mask;
sometimes he felt he couldn't bear it.  But he bore it.
Sometimes he longed for Alix so fiercely that he felt it
would be better to shoot himself than to suffer such
anguish.  He never saw her again.  Never.  He heard
from O'Malley that she had married and left her troupe.
She must be a fat old woman now and it doesn't matter
any more.  But he had wasted his life.  And he never
even made that poor creature whom he married happy.
How could he go on hiding from her year after year that
he had nothing to give her but pity?  Once in his agony
he told her about Alix and she tortured him ever after
with her jealousy.  He knew that he should never have
married her; in six months she would have got over her
grief if he had told her he could not bear to, and in the
end would have happily married somebody else.  So far
as she was concerned his sacrifice was vain.  He was
terribly conscious that he had only one life and it seemed
so sad to think that he had wasted it.  He could never
surmount his immeasurable regret.  He laughed when
people spoke of him as a strong man: he was as weak
and unstable as water.  And that's why I tell you that
Byring is right.  Even though it only lasts five years,
even though he ruins his career, even though this
marriage of his ends in disaster, it will have been worth
while.  He will have been satisfied.  He will have
fulfilled himself."
</p>

<p>
At that moment the door opened and a lady came
in.  The ambassador glanced at her and for an instant
a look of cold hatred crossed his face, but it was
only for an instant; then, rising from the table, he
composed his ravaged features to an expression of
courteous suavity.  He gave the incomer a haggard
smile.
</p>

<p>
"Here is my wife.  This is Mr. Ashenden."
</p>

<p>
"I couldn't imagine where you were.  Why didn't you
go and sit in your study?  I'm sure Mr. Ashenden's been
dreadfully uncomfortable."
</p>

<p>
She was a tall, thin woman of fifty, rather drawn and
faded, but she looked as though she had once been
pretty.  It was obvious that she was very well-bred.  She
vaguely reminded you of an exotic plant, reared in a
hot-house, that had begun to lose its bloom.  She was
dressed in black.
</p>

<p>
"What was the concert like?" asked Sir Herbert.
</p>

<p>
"Oh, not bad at all.  They gave a Brahms' Concerto
and the 'Fire-music' from the <i>Walküre</i>, and some
Hungarian dances of Dvorák.  I thought them rather
showy."  She turned to Ashenden.  "I hope you haven't
been bored all alone with my husband.  What have you
been talking about?  Art and Literature?"
</p>

<p>
"No, its raw material," said Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
He took his leave.
</p>

<p><br /><br /><br /></p>

<p><a id="chap13"></a></p>

<h3>
XIII
<br /><br />
<i>The Flip of a Coin</i>
</h3>

<p>
It was high time.  Snow had fallen in the
morning, but now the sky was clear and
Ashenden, with a glance at the frosty stars,
stepped out quickly.  He feared that Herbartus, tired of
waiting for him, might have gone home.  He had at this
interview to make a certain decision and the hesitation
he felt about it had lurked throughout the evening at
the back of his mind like a malaise that had only to
become a little more definite to be felt as pain.  For
Herbartus, indefatigable and determined, had been
engaged in the arrangement of a scheme to blow up certain
munition factories in Austria.  It is not necessary to give
here the details of his plan, but it was ingenious and
effective; its drawback was that it entailed the death and
mutilation of a good many Galician Poles, his fellow
countrymen, who were working in the factories in
question.  He had told Ashenden earlier in the day that
everything was ready and he had only to give the word.
</p>

<p>
"But please do not give it unless it is essential," he
said in his precise, somewhat throaty English.  "Of
course we will not hesitate if it is necessary, but we do
not want to sacrifice our own people for nothing."
</p>

<p>
"When do you want an answer?"
</p>

<p>
"To-night.  We have got someone who is starting
for Prague to-morrow morning."
</p>

<p>
It was then that Ashenden had made the appointment
that he was now hurrying to keep.
</p>

<p>
"You will not be late, will you?" Herbartus had said.
"I shall not be able to catch the messenger after
midnight."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden had qualms and he was conscious that it
would be a relief if on reaching the hotel he found that
Herbartus had left.  That would give him a respite.  The
Germans had blown up factories in the Allied countries
and there was no reason why they should not be served
in the same manner.  It was a legitimate act of war.  It
not only hindered the manufacture of arms and munitions,
but also shook the morale of the non-combatants.
It was not of course a thing that the big-wigs cared to
have anything to do with.  Though ready enough to
profit by the activities of obscure agents of whom they
had never heard, they shut their eyes to dirty work so
that they could put their clean hands on their hearts and
congratulate themselves that they had never done
anything that was unbecoming to men of honour.  Ashenden
thought with cynical humour of an incident in his
relations with R.  He had been approached with an offer
that he thought it his duty to put before his chief.
</p>

<p>
"By the way," he said to him as casually as possible,
"I've got a sportsman who's willing to assassinate King
B. for five thousand pounds."
</p>

<p>
King B. was the ruler of a Balkan state which was on
the verge through his influence of declaring war against
the Allies, and it was evident that his disappearance from
the scene would be extremely useful.  His successor's
sympathies were indefinite and it might be possible to
persuade him to keep his country neutral.  Ashenden
saw from R.'s quick, intent look that he was perfectly
aware of the situation.  But he frowned sulkily.
</p>

<p>
"Well, what of it?"
</p>

<p>
"I told him I'd transmit his offer.  I believe he's
perfectly genuine.  He's pro-Ally and he thinks it would
about bust his country if it went in on the side of the
Germans."
</p>

<p>
"What's he want five thousand pounds for, then?"
</p>

<p>
"It's a risk and if he does the Allies a good turn
he doesn't see why he shouldn't get something out
of it."
</p>

<p>
R. shook his head energetically.
</p>

<p>
"It's not the kind of thing we can have anything
to do with.  We don't wage war by those methods.
We leave them to the Germans.  Damn it all, we are
gentlemen."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden did not reply, but watched R. with attention.
There was in his eyes the curious reddish light that
they sometimes had and that gave them so sinister an
expression.  He had always a slight tendency to squint
and now he was quite definitely cross-eyed.
</p>

<p>
"You ought to know better than to put up a
proposition like that to me.  Why didn't you knock the
man down when he made it?"
</p>

<p>
"I didn't think I could," said Ashenden.  "He was
bigger than I.  Besides, it never occurred to me.  He
was very civil and obliging."
</p>

<p>
"Of course it would be a damned good thing for the
Allies if King B. were out of the way.  I admit that.
But between that and countenancing his assassination
there's all the difference between black and white.  If
the man were a patriot I should have thought he'd have
gone straight ahead and done what he thought right
regardless."
</p>

<p>
"He may be thinking of his widow," said Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"Anyhow, it's not a matter I'm prepared to discuss.
Different people look at things in different ways and
if anyone thought he was helping the Allies by taking
on his own shoulders a heavy responsibility that's of
course entirely his look-out."
</p>

<p>
It took Ashenden a moment to see what his chief
meant.  Then he smiled thinly.
</p>

<p>
"Don't think I'm going to pay the fellow five
thousand pounds out of my own pocket.  Not a chance."
</p>

<p>
"I don't think anything of the kind and you know I
don't, and I shall be obliged if you won't exercise your
very deficient sense of humour on me."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden shrugged his shoulders; and now, recalling
the conversation, he shrugged them again.  They were
all like that.  They desired the end, but hesitated at the
means.  They were willing to take advantage of an
accomplished fact, but wanted to shift on to someone
else the responsibility of bringing it about.
</p>

<p>
Ashenden entered the café of the Hotel de Paris and
saw Herbartus seated at a table facing the door.  He
gave the little gasp that is forced from you when you
dive into water that is colder than you expected.  There
was no escape.  He must make the decision.  Herbartus
was drinking a glass of tea.  His heavy, clean-shaven
face lit up when he saw Ashenden and he stretched out
a large, hairy hand.  He was a big, dark fellow, of a
powerful build, with fierce black eyes.  Everything
about him suggested a massive strength.  He was
hampered by no scruples, and since he was disinterested he
was ruthless.
</p>

<p>
"Well, how did your dinner go off?" he asked as
Ashenden sat down.  "Did you say anything to the
ambassador about our project?"
</p>

<p>
"No."
</p>

<p>
"I think you were wise.  It is best to leave those sort
of people out of serious matters."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden looked at Herbartus for a minute reflectively.
His face bore a singular expression and he sat
warily like a tiger about to spring.
</p>

<p>
"Have you ever read Balzac's <i>Père Goriot</i>?" asked
Ashenden suddenly.
</p>

<p>
"Twenty years ago, when I was a student."
</p>

<p>
"Do you remember that conversation between
Rastignac and Vautrin where they discuss the question
whether, were you able by a nod to effect the death of
a mandarin in China and so bring yourself a colossal
fortune, you would give the nod?  It was a notion of
Rousseau's."
</p>

<p>
Herbartus's large face coiled itself into a slow, large
smile.
</p>

<p>
"It has nothing to do with the case.  You are uneasy
at giving an order that will cause the death of a
considerable number of people.  Is it for your own profit?
When a general orders an advance he knows that so
and so many men will be killed.  It is war."
</p>

<p>
"What a stupid war!"
</p>

<p>
"It will give my country freedom."
</p>

<p>
"What will your country do with it when it gets it?"
</p>

<p>
Herbartus did not answer.  He shrugged his shoulders.
</p>

<p>
"I warn you that if you do not take this opportunity it
may not recur very soon.  We cannot send a messenger
over the frontier every day of the week."
</p>

<p>
"Doesn't it make you a little uncomfortable to think
of all those men being suddenly blown to smithereens
by an explosion?  And then it's not only the dead, it's
the maimed."
</p>

<p>
"I don't like it.  I said to you that on account of my
fellow countrymen who will be sacrificed we should do
nothing unless it was worth while.  I do not want those
poor fellows to be killed, but if they are I shall not
sleep less soundly nor eat my dinner with less appetite.
Will you?"
</p>

<p>
"I suppose not."
</p>

<p>
"Well, then?"
</p>

<p>
Ashenden thought on a sudden of those sharp-pointed
stars on which for a moment his eyes had rested as he
walked through the frosty night.  It seemed an age since
he had sat in the spacious dining-room at the embassy
and listened to Sir Herbert Witherspoon's story of his
successful, wasted life.  Mr. Schäfer's susceptibilities
and his own small intrigues, the love of Byring and
Rose Auburn: how unimportant; Man, with so short a
time between the cradle and the grave, spent his life
in foolishness.  A trivial creature!  The bright stars
shone in the cloudless sky.
</p>

<p>
"I'm tired, I can't think with any clearness."
</p>

<p>
"I must go in a minute."
</p>

<p>
"Then let's toss for it, shall we?"
</p>

<p>
"Toss?"
</p>

<p>
"Yes," said Ashenden, taking a coin out of his
pocket.  "If it comes down heads tell your man to go
ahead and if it comes down tails tell him to do
nothing."
</p>

<p>
"Very well."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden balanced the coin on his thumb-nail and
flicked it neatly into the air.  They watched it spin and
when it fell back on the table Ashenden put his hand
over it.  They both leaned forward to look as Ashenden
very slowly withdrew his hand.  Herbartus drew a deep
breath.
</p>

<p>
"Well, that's that," said Ashenden.
</p>

<p><br /><br /><br /></p>

<p><a id="chap14"></a></p>

<h3>
XIV
<br />
<i>A Chance Acquaintance</i>
</h3>

<p>
When Ashenden went on deck and saw
before him a low-lying coast and a white
town he felt a pleasant flutter of
excitement.  It was early and the sun had not
long risen, but the sea was glassy and the sky was blue;
it was warm already and one knew that the day would
be sweltering.  Vladivostok.  It really gave one the
sensation of being at the end of the world.  It was a long
journey that Ashenden had made from New York to
San Francisco, across the Pacific in a Japanese boat to
Yokohama, then from Tsuruki in a Russian boat, he
the only Englishman on board, up the Sea of Japan.
From Vladivostok he was to take the Trans-Siberian to
Petrograd.  It was the most important mission that he
had ever had and he was pleased with the sense of
responsibility that it gave him.  He had no one to give
him orders, unlimited funds (he carried in a belt next
to his skin bills of exchange for a sum so enormous that
he was staggered when he thought of them), and though
he had been set to do something that was beyond human
possibility he did not know this and was prepared to
set about his task with confidence.  He believed in his
own astuteness.  Though he had both esteem and
admiration for the sensibility of the human race, he had
little respect for their intelligence: man has always
found it easier to sacrifice his life than to learn the
multiplication table.
</p>

<p>
Ashenden did not much look forward to ten days on a
Russian train, and in Yokohama he had heard rumours
that in one or two places bridges had been blown up
and the line cut.  He was told that the soldiers,
completely out of hand, would rob him of everything he
possessed and turn him out on the steppe to shift for
himself.  It was a cheerful prospect.  But the train was
certainly starting and whatever happened later (and
Ashenden had always a feeling that things never turned
out as badly as you expected) he was determined to get
a place on it.  His intention on landing was to go at
once to the British Consulate and find out what
arrangements had been made for him; but as they neared the
shore and he was able to discern the untidy and bedraggled
town he felt not a little forlorn.  He knew but
a few words of Russian.  The only man on the ship who
spoke English was the purser and though he promised
Ashenden to do anything he could to help him,
Ashenden had the impression that he must not too
greatly count upon him.  It was a relief then, when they
docked, to have a young man, small and with a mop of
untidy hair, obviously a Jew, come up to him and ask
if his name was Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"Mine is Benedict.  I'm the interpreter at the British
Consulate.  I've been told to look after you.  We've got
you a place on the train to-night."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden's spirits went up.  They landed.  The little
Jew looked after his luggage and had his passport
examined and then, getting into a car that waited for
them, they drove off to the Consulate.
</p>

<p>
"I've had instructions to offer you every facility,"
said the Consul, "and you've only got to tell me what
you want.  I've fixed you up all right on the train, but
God knows if you'll ever get to Petrograd.  Oh, by the
way, I've got a travelling companion for you.  He's a
man called Harrington, an American, and he's going
to Petrograd for a firm in Philadelphia.  He's trying to
fix up some deal with the Provisional Government."
</p>

<p>
"What's he like?" asked Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"Oh, he's all right.  I wanted him to come with the
American Consul to luncheon, but they've gone for an
excursion in the country.  You must get to the station a
couple of hours before the train starts.  There's always
an awful scrimmage and if you're not there in good
time someone will pinch your seat."
</p>

<p>
The train started at midnight and Ashenden dined
with Benedict at the station restaurant which was, it
appeared, the only place in that slatternly town where
you could get a decent meal.  It was crowded.  The
service was intolerably slow.  Then they went on to the
platform, where, though they had still two hours to
spare, there was already a seething mob.  Whole
families, sitting on piles of luggage, seemed to be
camped there.  People rushed to and fro, or stood in
little groups violently arguing.  Women screamed.
Others were silently weeping.  Here two men were
engaged in a fierce quarrel.  It was a scene of
indescribable confusion.  The light in the station was wan
and cold and the white faces of all those people were
like the white faces of the dead waiting, patient or
anxious, distraught or penitent, for the judgment of
the last day.  The train was made up and most of
the carriages were already filled to overflowing.
When at last Benedict found that in which Ashenden
had his place a man sprang out of it excitedly.
</p>

<p>
"Come in and sit down," he said.  "I've had the
greatest difficulty in keeping your seat.  A fellow wanted
to come in here with a wife and two children.  My
Consul has just gone off with him to see the
station-master."
</p>

<p>
"This is Mr. Harrington," said Benedict.
</p>

<p>
Ashenden stepped into the carriage.  It had two
berths in it.  The porter stowed his luggage away.  He
shook hands with his travelling companion.
</p>

<p>
Mr. John Quincy Harrington was a very thin man
of somewhat less than middle height, he had a yellow,
bony face, with large, pale-blue eyes and when he took
off his hat to wipe his brow wet from the perturbation
he had endured he showed a large, bald skull; it was
very bony and the ridges and protuberances stood out
disconcertingly.  He wore a bowler hat, a black coat
and waistcoat, and a pair of striped trousers; a very high
white collar and a neat, unobtrusive tie.  Ashenden did
not know precisely how you should dress in order to
take a ten days' journey across Siberia, but he could not
but think that Mr. Harrington's costume was eccentric.
He spoke with precision in a high-pitched voice and
in an accent that Ashenden recognised as that of New
England.
</p>

<p>
In a minute the station-master came accompanied by
a bearded Russian, suffering evidently from profound
emotion, and followed by a lady holding two children
by the hand.  The Russian, tears running down his face,
was talking with quivering lips to the station-master
and his wife between her sobs was apparently telling
him the story of her life.  When they arrived at the
carriage the altercation became more violent and Benedict
joined in with his fluent Russian.  Mr. Harrington
did not know a word of the language, but being
obviously of an excitable turn broke in and explained in
voluble English that these seats had been booked by
the Consuls of Great Britain and the United States
respectively, and though he didn't know about the King
of England, he could tell them straight and they could
take it from him that the President of the United States
would never permit an American citizen to be done out
of a seat on the train that he had duly paid for.  He would
yield to force, but to nothing else, and if they touched
him he would register a complaint with the Consul at
once.  He said all this and a great deal more to the
station-master, who of course had no notion what he
was talking about, but with much emphasis and a good
deal of gesticulation made him in reply a passionate
speech.  This roused Mr. Harrington to the utmost
pitch of indignation, for shaking his fist in the
station-master's face, his own pale with fury, he cried out:
</p>

<p>
"Tell him I don't understand a word he says and I
don't want to understand.  If the Russians want us to
look upon them as a civilised people, why don't they
talk a civilised language?  Tell him that I am Mr. John
Quincy Harrington and I'm travelling on behalf of
Messrs. Crewe and Adams of Philadelphia with a special
letter of introduction to Mr. Kerensky and if I'm not
left in peaceful possession of this carriage Mr. Crewe
will take the matter up with the Administration in
Washington."
</p>

<p>
Mr. Harrington's manner was so truculent and his
gestures so menacing that the station-master, throwing
up the sponge, turned on his heel without another word
and walked moodily away.  He was followed by the
bearded Russian and his wife arguing heatedly with him
and the two apathetic children.  Mr. Harrington jumped
back into the carriage.
</p>

<p>
"I'm terribly sorry to have to refuse to give up my
seat to a lady with two children," he said.  "No one
knows better than I the respect due to a woman and a
mother, but I've got to get to Petrograd by this train if
I don't want to lose a very important order and I'm not
going to spend ten days in a corridor for all the mothers
in Russia."
</p>

<p>
"I don't blame you," said Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"I am a married man and I have two children myself.
I know that travelling with your family is a difficult
matter, but there's nothing that I know to prevent you
from staying at home."
</p>

<p>
When you are shut up with a man for ten days in a
railway carriage you can hardly fail to learn most of what
there is to know about him, and for ten days (for eleven
to be exact) Ashenden spent twenty-four hours a day
with Mr. Harrington.  It is true that they went into the
dining-room three times a day for their meals, but they
sat opposite to one another; it is true that the train
stopped for an hour morning and afternoon so that they
were able to have a tramp up and down the platform, but
they walked side by side.  Ashenden made acquaintance
with some of his fellow-travellers and sometimes they
came into the compartment to have a chat, but if they
only spoke French or German Mr. Harrington would
watch them with acidulous disapproval and if they spoke
English he would never let them get a word in.  For
Mr. Harrington was a talker.  He talked as though it
were a natural function of the human being, automatically,
as men breathe or digest their food; he talked not
because he had something to say, but because he could
not help himself, in a high-pitched, nasal voice, without
inflection, at one dead level of tone.  He talked with
precision, using a copious vocabulary and forming his
sentences with deliberation; he never used a short word
when a longer one would do; he never paused.  He went
on and on.  It was not a torrent, for there was nothing
impetuous about it, it was like a stream of lava pouring
irresistibly down the side of a volcano.  It flowed with a
quiet and steady force that overwhelmed everything that
was in its path.
</p>

<p>
Ashenden thought he had never known as much
about anyone as he knew about Mr. Harrington, and not
only about him, with all his opinions, habits and
circumstances, but about his wife and his wife's family, his
children and their schoolfellows, his employers and the
alliances they had made for three or four generations
with the best families of Philadelphia.  His own family
had come from Devonshire early in the eighteenth
century and Mr. Harrington had been to the village
where the graves of his forebears were still to be seen in
the churchyard.  He was proud of his English ancestry,
but proud too of his American birth, though to him
America was a little strip of land along the Atlantic
coast and Americans were a small number of persons of
English or Dutch origin whose blood had never been
sullied by foreign admixture.  He looked upon the
Germans, Swedes, Irish and the inhabitants of Central
and Eastern Europe who for the last hundred years have
descended upon the United States as interlopers.  He
turned his attention away from them as a maiden lady
who lived in a secluded manor might avert her eyes
from the factory chimneys that had trespassed upon her
retirement.
</p>

<p>
When Ashenden mentioned a man of vast wealth who
owned some of the finest pictures in America
Mr. Harrington said:
</p>

<p>
"I've never met him.  My great-aunt Maria Penn
Warmington always said his grandmother was a very
good cook.  My great-aunt Maria was terribly sorry
when she left her to get married.  She said she never
knew anyone who could make an apple pancake as she
could."
</p>

<p>
Mr. Harrington was devoted to his wife and he told
Ashenden at unbelievable length how cultivated and
what a perfect mother she was.  She had delicate health
and had undergone a great number of operations all of
which he described in detail.  He had had two operations
himself, one on his tonsils and one to remove his
appendix and he took Ashenden day by day through his
experiences.  All his friends had had operations and his
knowledge of surgery was encyclopædic.  He had two
sons, both at school, and he was seriously considering
whether he would not be well-advised to have them
operated on.  It was curious that one of them should
have enlarged tonsils, and he was not at all happy about
the appendix of the other.  They were more devoted to
one another than he had ever seen two brothers be and a
very good friend of his, the brightest surgeon in
Philadelphia, had offered to operate on them both
together so that they should not be separated.  He
showed Ashenden photographs of the boys and their
mother.  This journey of his to Russia was the first time
in their lives that he had been separated from them and
every morning he wrote a long letter to his wife telling
her everything that had happened and a good deal of
what he had said during the day.  Ashenden watched
him cover sheet after sheet of paper with his neat,
legible and precise handwriting.
</p>

<p>
Mr. Harrington had read all the books on conversation
and knew its technique to the last detail.  He had a
little book in which he noted down the stories he heard
and he told Ashenden that when he was going out to
dinner he always looked up half a dozen so that he
should not be at a loss.  They were marked with a G if
they could be told in general society and with an M (for
men) if they were more fit for rough masculine ears.  He
was a specialist in that peculiar form of anecdote that
consists in narrating a long serious incident, piling detail
upon detail, till a comic end is reached.  He spared you
nothing and Ashenden foreseeing the point long before
it arrived would clench his hands and knit his brows in
the strenuous effort not to betray his impatience and at
last force from his unwilling mouth a grim and hollow
laugh.  If someone came into the compartment in the
middle Mr. Harrington would greet him with cordiality.
</p>

<p>
"Come right in and sit down.  I was just telling my
friend a story.  You must listen to it, it's one of the
funniest things you ever heard."
</p>

<p>
Then he would begin again from the very beginning
and repeat it word for word, without altering a single apt
epithet, till he reached the humorous end.  Ashenden
suggested once that they should see whether they could
find two people on the train who played cards so that
they might while away the time with a game of bridge,
but Mr. Harrington said he never touched cards and
when Ashenden in desperation began to play patience he
pulled a wry face.
</p>

<p>
"It beats me how an intelligent man can waste his
time card-playing, and of all the unintellectual pursuits I
have ever seen it seems to me that solitaire is the worst.
It kills conversation.  Man is a social animal and he
exercises the highest part of his nature when he takes
part in social intercourse."
</p>

<p>
"There is a certain elegance in wasting time," said
Ashenden.  "Any fool can waste money, but when you
waste time you waste what is priceless.  Besides," he
added with bitterness, "you can still talk."
</p>

<p>
"How can I talk when your attention is taken up by
whether you are going to get a black seven to put on a
red eight?  Conversation calls forth the highest powers
of the intellect and if you have made a study of it you
have the right to expect that the person you're talking to
will give you the fullest attention he is capable of."
</p>

<p>
He did not say this acrimoniously, but with the
good-humoured patience of a man who has been much tried.
He was just stating a plain fact and Ashenden could take
it or leave it.  It was the claim of the artist to have his
work taken seriously.
</p>

<p>
Mr. Harrington was a diligent reader.  He read pencil
in hand, underlining passages that attracted his attention
and on the margin making in his neat writing comments
on what he read.  This he was fond of discussing and
when Ashenden himself was reading and felt on a
sudden that Mr. Harrington, book in one hand and
pencil in the other, was looking at him with his large
pale eyes he began to have violent palpitations of the
heart.  He dared not look up, he dared not even turn the
page, for he knew that Mr. Harrington would regard
this as ample excuse to break into a discourse, but
remained with his eyes fixed desperately on a single
word, like a chicken with its beak to a chalk line, and
only ventured to breathe when he realised that
Mr. Harrington, having given up the attempt, had resumed
his reading.  He was then engaged on a History of the
American Constitution in two volumes and for recreation
was perusing a stout volume that purported to
contain all the great speeches of the world.  For
Mr. Harrington was an after-dinner speaker and had read all
the best books on speaking in public.  He knew exactly
how to get on good terms with his audience, just where
to put in the serious words that touched their hearts,
how to catch their attention by a few apt stories and
finally with what degree of eloquence, suiting the
occasion, to deliver his peroration.
</p>

<p>
Mr. Harrington was very fond of reading aloud.
Ashenden had had frequent occasion to observe the
distressing propensity of Americans for this pastime.  In
hotel drawing-rooms at night after dinner he had often
seen the father of a family seated in a retired corner and
surrounded by his wife, his two sons and his daughter,
reading to them.  On ships crossing the Atlantic he had
sometimes watched with awe the tall, spare gentleman of
commanding aspect who sat in the centre of fifteen
ladies no longer in their first youth and in a resonant
voice read to them the history of Art.  Walking up and
down the promenade deck he had passed honeymooning
couples lying on deck-chairs and caught the unhurried
tones of the bride as she read to her young husband the
pages of a popular novel.  It had always seemed to him a
curious way of showing affection.  He had had friends
who had offered to read to him and he had known
women who had said they loved being read to, but he
had always politely refused the invitation and firmly
ignored the hint.  He liked neither reading aloud nor
being read aloud to.  In his heart he thought the
national predilection for this form of entertainment the
only flaw in the perfection of the American character.
But the immortal gods love a good laugh at the expense
of human beings and now delivered him, bound and
helpless, to the knife of the high priest.  Mr. Harrington
flattered himself that he was a very good reader and he
explained to Ashenden the theory and practice of the
art.  Ashenden learned that there were two schools, the
dramatic and the natural: in the first you imitated the
voices of those who spoke (if you were reading a novel),
and when the heroine wailed you wailed and when
emotion choked her you choked too; but in the other
you read as impassively as though you were reading the
price-list of a mail-order house in Chicago.  This was the
school Mr. Harrington belonged to.  In the seventeen
years of his married life he had read aloud to his wife,
and to his sons as soon as they were old enough to
appreciate them, the novels of Sir Walter Scott, Jane
Austen, Dickens, the Brontë Sisters, Thackeray, George
Eliot, Nathaniel Hawthorne and W. D. Howells.
Ashenden came to the conclusion that it was second
nature with Mr. Harrington to read aloud and to
prevent him from doing so made him as uneasy as
cutting off his tobacco made the confirmed smoker.
He would take you unawares.
</p>

<p>
"Listen to this," he would say, "you must listen to
this," as though he were suddenly struck by the
excellence of a maxim or the neatness of a phrase.  "Now
just tell me if you don't think this is remarkably well
put.  It's only three lines."
</p>

<p>
He read them and Ashenden was willing to give him a
moment's attention, but having finished them, without
pausing for a moment to take breath, he went on.  He
went right on.  On and on.  In his measured high-pitched
voice, without emphasis or expression, he read
page after page.  Ashenden fidgeted, crossed and
uncrossed his legs, lit cigarettes and smoked them, sat first
in one position, then in another.  Mr. Harrington went
on and on.  The train went leisurely through the
interminable steppes of Siberia.  They passed villages
and crossed rivers.  Mr. Harrington went on and on.
When he finished a great speech by Edmund Burke he
put down the book in triumph.
</p>

<p>
"Now that in my opinion is one of the finest orations in
the English language.  It is certainly a part of our
common heritage that we can look upon with genuine
pride."
</p>

<p>
"Doesn't it seem to you a little ominous that the
people to whom Edmund Burke made that speech are
all dead?" asked Ashenden gloomily.
</p>

<p>
Mr. Harrington was about to reply that this was
hardly to be wondered at since the speech was made in
the eighteenth century, when it dawned upon him that
Ashenden (bearing up wonderfully under affliction as
any unprejudiced person could not fail to admit) was
making a joke.  He slapped his knee and laughed
heartily.
</p>

<p>
"Gee, that's a good one," he said.  "I'll write that
down in my little book.  I see exactly how I can bring it
in one time when I have to speak at our luncheon club."
</p>

<p>
Mr. Harrington was a highbrow; but that appellation,
invented by the vulgar as a term of abuse, he had
accepted like the instrument of a saint's martyrdom, the
gridiron of Saint Laurence for instance or the wheel of
Saint Catherine, as an honorific title.  He gloried in it.
</p>

<p>
"Emerson was a highbrow," he said.  "Longfellow
was a highbrow.  Oliver Wendell Holmes was a
highbrow.  James Russell Lowell was a highbrow."
</p>

<p>
Mr. Harrington's study of American literature had
taken him no further down the years than the period
during which those eminent, but not precisely thrilling
authors, flourished.
</p>

<p>
Mr. Harrington was a bore.  He exasperated Ashenden,
and enraged him; he got on his nerves, and drove
him to frenzy.  But Ashenden did not dislike him.  His
self-satisfaction was enormous but so ingenuous that
you could not resent it; his conceit was so childlike that
you could only smile at it.  He was so well-meaning, so
thoughtful, so deferential, so polite that though
Ashenden would willingly have killed him he could not but
own that in that short while he had conceived for
Mr. Harrington something very like affection.  His manners
were exquisite, formal, a trifle elaborate perhaps (there
is no harm in that, for good manners are the product of
an artificial state of society and so can bear a touch of the
powdered wig and the lace ruffle), but though natural to
his good breeding they gained a pleasant significance
from his good heart.  He was ready to do anyone a
kindness and seemed to find nothing too much trouble
if he could thereby oblige his fellow man.  He was
eminently <i>serviable</i>.  And it may be that this is a word for
which there is no exact translation because the charming
quality it denotes is not very common among our
practical people.  When Ashenden was ill for a couple of
days Mr. Harrington nursed him with devotion.
Ashenden was embarrassed by the care he took of him
and though racked with pain could not help laughing at
the fussy attention with which Mr. Harrington took his
temperature, from his neatly packed valise extracted a
whole regiment of tabloids and firmly doctored him;
and he was touched by the trouble he gave himself to
get from the dining-car the things that he thought
Ashenden could eat.  He did everything in the world for
him but stop talking.
</p>

<p>
It was only when he was dressing that Mr. Harrington
was silent, for then his maidenly mind was singly
occupied with the problem of changing his clothes
before Ashenden without indelicacy.  He was extremely
modest.  He changed his linen every day, neatly taking
it out of his suit-case and neatly putting back what was
soiled; but he performed miracles of dexterity in order
during the process not to show an inch of bare skin.
After a day or two Ashenden gave up the struggle to
keep neat and clean in that dirty train, with one lavatory
for the whole carriage, and soon was as grubby as the
rest of the passengers; but Mr. Harrington refused to
yield to the difficulties.  He performed his toilet with
deliberation, notwithstanding the impatient persons
who rattled the door-handle, and returned from the
lavatory every morning washed, shining and smelling of
soap.  Once dressed, in his black coat, striped trousers
and well-polished shoes, he looked as spruce as though
he had just stepped out of his tidy little red-brick house
in Philadelphia and was about to board the street-car
that would take him down town to his office.  At one
point of the journey it was announced that an attempt
had been made to blow up a bridge and that there were
disturbances at the next station over the river; it might
be that the train would be stopped and the passengers
turned adrift or taken prisoners.  Ashenden, thinking he
might be separated from his luggage, took the precaution
to change into his thickest clothes so that if he
had to pass the winter in Siberia he need suffer as little as
necessary from the cold; but Mr. Harrington would not
listen to reason; he made no preparations for the possible
experience and Ashenden had the conviction that if he
spent three months in a Russian prison he would still
preserve that smart and natty appearance.  A troop of
Cossacks boarded the train and stood on the platform of
each carriage with their guns loaded, and the train
rattled gingerly over the damaged bridge; then they
came to the station at which they had been warned of
danger, put on steam and dashed straight through it.
Mr. Harrington was mildly satirical when Ashenden
changed back into a light summer suit.
</p>

<p>
Mr. Harrington was a keen business man.  It was
obvious that it would need someone very astute to
over-reach him and Ashenden was sure that his employers
had been well-advised to send him on this errand.  He
would safeguard their interests with all his might and if
he succeeded in driving a bargain with the Russians it
would be a hard one.  His loyalty to his firm demanded
that.  He spoke of the partners with affectionate
reverence.  He loved them and was proud of them; but he
did not envy them because their wealth was great.  He
was quite content to work on a salary and thought
himself adequately paid; so long as he could educate his
boys and leave his widow enough to live on, what was
money to him?  He thought it a trifle vulgar to be rich.
He looked upon culture as more important than money.
He was careful of it and after every meal put down in his
note-book exactly what it had cost him.  His firm might
be certain that he would not charge a penny more for his
expenses than he had spent.  But having discovered that
poor people came to the station at the stopping places of
the train to beg and seeing that the war had really
brought them to destitution he took care before each
halt to supply himself with ample small change and in a
shame-faced way, mocking himself for being taken in by
such impostors, distributed everything in his pocket.
</p>

<p>
"Of course I know they don't deserve it," he said,
"and I don't do it for them.  I do it entirely for my own
peace of mind.  I should feel so terribly badly if I
thought some man really was hungry and I'd refused to
give him the price of a meal."
</p>

<p>
Mr. Harrington was absurd, but lovable.  It was
inconceivable that anyone should be rude to him, it
would have seemed as dreadful as hitting a child; and
Ashenden, chafing inwardly but with a pretence of
amiability, suffered meekly and with a truly Christian
spirit the affliction of the gentle, ruthless creature's
society.  It took eleven days at that time to get from
Vladivostok to Petrograd and Ashenden felt that he
could not have borne another day.  If it had been twelve
he would have killed Mr. Harrington.
</p>

<p>
When at last (Ashenden tired and dirty, Mr. Harrington
neat, sprightly and sententious) they reached the
outskirts of Petrograd and stood at the window looking
at the crowded houses of the city, Mr. Harrington
turned to Ashenden and said:
</p>

<p>
"Well, I never would have thought that eleven days
in the train would pass so quickly.  We've had a
wonderful time.  I've enjoyed your company and I know you've
enjoyed mine.  I'm not going to pretend I don't know
that I'm a pretty good conversationalist.  But now we've
come together like this we must take care to stay
together.  We must see as much of one another as we
can while I'm in Petrograd."
</p>

<p>
"I shall have a great deal to do," said Ashenden.
"I'm afraid my time won't be altogether my own."
</p>

<p>
"I know," answered Mr. Harrington cordially.  "I
expect to be pretty busy myself, but we can have
breakfast together anyway and we'll meet in the evening and
compare notes.  It would be too bad if we drifted apart
now."
</p>

<p>
"Too bad," sighed Ashenden.
</p>

<p><br /><br /><br /></p>

<p><a id="chap15"></a></p>

<h3>
XV
<br /><br />
<i>Love and Russian Literature</i>
</h3>

<p>
When Ashenden found himself in his
bedroom at the hotel and, for the first time
for it seemed an age, alone he sat down
and looked about him.  He had not the
energy to start immediately to unpack.  How many of
these hotel bedrooms had he known since the beginning
of the war, grand or shabby, in one place and one land
after another!  It seemed to him that he had been living
in his luggage for as long as he could remember.  He
was weary.  He asked himself how he was going to set
about the work that he had been sent to do.  He felt lost
in the immensity of Russia and very solitary.  He had
protested when he was chosen for this mission, it looked
too large an order, but his protests were ignored.  He
was chosen not because those in authority thought him
particularly suited for the job, but because there was no
one to be found who was more suited.  There was a
knock at the door and Ashenden, pleased to make use of
the few words of the language he knew, called out in
Russian.  The door was opened.  He sprang to his feet.
</p>

<p>
"Come in, come in," he cried.  "I'm awfully glad to
see you."
</p>

<p>
Three men entered.  He knew them by sight, since
they had travelled on the same boat with him from San
Francisco to Yokohama, but following their instructions
no communications had passed between them and
Ashenden.  They were Czechs, exiled from their country
for their revolutionary activity and long settled in
America, who had been sent over to Russia to help
Ashenden in his mission and put him in touch with
Professor Z. whose authority over the Czechs in Russia
was absolute.  Their chief was a certain Dr. Egon Orth,
a tall thin man, with a little grey head; he was minister
to some church in the Middle West and a doctor of
divinity; but had abandoned his cure to work for the
liberation of his country, and Ashenden had the
impression that he was an intelligent fellow who would
not put too fine a point on matters of conscience.  A
parson with a fixed idea has this advantage over common
men, that he can persuade himself of the Almighty's
approval for almost any goings on.  Dr. Orth had a
merry twinkle in his eye and a dry humour.
</p>

<p>
Ashenden had had two secret interviews with him in
Yokohama and had learnt that Professor Z., though
eager to free his country from the Austrian rule and since
he knew that this could only come about by the downfall
of the Central Powers with the allies body and soul,
yet had scruples; he would not do things that outraged
his conscience, all must be straightforward and above
board, and so some things that it was necessary to do
had to be done without his knowledge.  His influence
was so great that his wishes could not be disregarded,
but on occasion it was felt better not to let him know too
much of what was going on.
</p>

<p>
Dr. Orth had arrived in Petrograd a week before
Ashenden and now put before him what he had learned
of the situation.  It seemed to Ashenden that it was
critical and if anything was to be done it must be done
quickly.  The army was dissatisfied and mutinous, the
Government under the weak Kerensky was tottering
and held power only because no one else had the courage
to seize it, famine was staring the country in the face and
already the possibility had to be considered that the
Germans would march on Petrograd.  The ambassadors
of Great Britain and the United States had been apprised
of Ashenden's coming, but his mission was secret even
from them, and there were particular reasons why he
could demand no assistance from them.  He arranged
with Dr. Orth to make an appointment with Professor
Z. so that he could learn his views and explain to him
that he had the financial means to support any scheme
that seemed likely to prevent the catastrophe that the
Allied governments foresaw of Russia's making a
separate peace.  But he had to get in touch with
influential persons in all classes.  Mr. Harrington with his
business proposition and his letters to Ministers of State
would be thrown in contact with members of the
Government and Mr. Harrington wanted an interpreter.
Dr. Orth spoke Russian almost as well as his own
language and it struck Ashenden that he would be
admirably suited to the post.  He explained the
circumstances to him and it was arranged that while Ashenden
and Mr. Harrington were at luncheon Dr. Orth should
come in, greeting Ashenden as though he had not seen
him before, and be introduced to Mr. Harrington; then
Ashenden, guiding the conversation, would suggest to
Mr. Harrington that the heavens had sent in Dr. Orth
the ideal man for his purpose.
</p>

<p>
But there was another person on whom Ashenden
had fixed as possibly useful to him and now he said:
"Have you ever heard of a woman called Anastasia
Alexandrovna Leonidov?  She's the daughter of
Alexander Denisiev."
</p>

<p>
"I know all about him of course."
</p>

<p>
"I have reason to believe she's in Petrograd.  Will you
find out where she lives and what she's doing?"
</p>

<p>
"Certainly."
</p>

<p>
Dr. Orth spoke in Czech to one of the two men who
accompanied him.  They were sharp-looking fellows,
both of them, one was tall and fair and the other was
short and dark, but they were younger than Dr. Orth
and Ashenden understood that they were there to do as
he bade them.  The man nodded, got up, shook hands
with Ashenden and went out.
</p>

<p>
"You shall have all the information possible this
afternoon."
</p>

<p>
"Well, I think there's nothing more we can do for the
present," said Ashenden.  "To tell you the truth I
haven't had a bath for eleven days and I badly want
one."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden had never quite made up his mind whether
the pleasure of reflection was better pursued in a railway
carriage or in a bath.  So far as the act of invention was
concerned he was inclined to prefer a train that went
smoothly and not too fast, and many of his best ideas
had come to him when he was thus traversing the plains
of France; but for the delight of reminiscence or the
entertainment of embroidery upon a theme already in his
head he had no doubt that nothing could compare with
a hot bath.  He considered now, wallowing in soapy
water like a water-buffalo in a muddy pond, the grim
pleasantry of his relations with Anastasia Alexandrovna
Leonidov.
</p>

<p>
In these stories no more than the barest suggestion
has been made that Ashenden was capable on occasions
of the passion ironically called tender.  The specialists
in this matter, those charming creatures who make a
business of what philosophers know is but a diversion,
assert that writers, painters and musicians, all in short
who are connected with the arts, in the relation of love,
cut no very conspicuous figure.  There is much cry but
little wool.  They rave or sigh, make phrases and strike
many a romantic attitude, but in the end, loving art or
themselves (which with them is one and the same thing)
better than the object of their emotion, offer a shadow
when the said object, with the practical common sense of
the sex, demands a substance.  It may be so and this may
be the reason (never before suggested) why women in
their souls look upon art with such a virulent hatred.
Be this as it may Ashenden in the last twenty years had
felt his heart go pit-a-pat because of one charming
person after another.  He had had a good deal of fun and
had paid for it with a great deal of misery, but even
when suffering most acutely from the pangs of unrequited
love he had been able to say to himself, albeit
with a wry face, after all, it's grist to the mill.
</p>

<p>
Anastasia Alexandrovna Leonidov was the daughter
of a revolutionary who had escaped from Siberia after
being sentenced to penal servitude for life and had
settled in England.  He was an able man and had
supported himself for thirty years by the activity of a
restless pen and had even made himself a distinguished
position in English letters.  When Anastasia
Alexandrovna reached a suitable age she married Vladimir
Semenovich Leonidov, also an exile from his native
country, and it was after she had been married to him for
some years that Ashenden made her acquaintance.  It
was at the time when Europe discovered Russia.  Everyone
was reading the Russian novelists, the Russian
dancers captivated the civilised world, and the Russian
composers set shivering the sensibility of persons who
were beginning to want a change from Wagner.  Russian
art seized upon Europe with the virulence of an epidemic
of influenza.  New phrases became the fashion, new
colours, new emotions, and the highbrows described
themselves without a moment's hesitation as members of
the intelligentsia.  It was a difficult word to spell but an
easy one to say.  Ashenden fell like the rest, changed the
cushions of his sitting-room, hung an eikon on the wall,
read Chekoff and went to the ballet.
</p>

<p>
Anastasia Alexandrovna was by birth, circumstances
and education very much a member of the intelligentsia.
She lived with her husband in a tiny house near Regent's
Park and here all the literary folk in London might gaze
with humble reverence at pale-faced bearded giants who
leaned against the wall like caryatids taking a day off;
they were revolutionaries to a man and it was a miracle
that they were not in the mines of Siberia.  Women of
letters tremulously put their lips to a glass of vodka.  If
you were lucky and greatly favoured you might shake
hands there with Diaghileff and now and again, like a
peach-blossom wafted by the breeze, Pavlova herself
hovered in and out.  At this time Ashenden's success
had not been so great as to affront the highbrows, he
had very distinctly been one of them in his youth, and
though some already looked askance, others (optimistic
creatures with a faith in human nature) still had hopes of
him.  Anastasia Alexandrovna told him to his face that
he was a member of the intelligentsia.  Ashenden was
quite ready to believe it.  He was in a state when he was
ready to believe anything.  He was thrilled and excited.
It seemed to him that at last he was about to capture that
illusive spirit of romance that he had so long been
chasing.  Anastasia Alexandrovna had fine eyes and a
good, though for these days, too voluptuous figure,
high cheek-bones and a snub nose (this was very
Tartar), a wide mouth full of large square teeth and a
pale skin.  She dressed somewhat flamboyantly.  In her
dark melancholy eyes Ashenden saw the boundless
steppes of Russia, and the Kremlin with its pealing bells,
and the solemn ceremonies of Easter at St. Isaac's, and
forests of silver beeches and the Nevsky Prospekt; it
was astonishing how much he saw in her eyes.  They
were round and shining and slightly protuberant like
those of a Pekinese.  They talked together of Alyosha in
the <i>Brothers Karamazov</i>, of Natasha in <i>War and Peace</i>, of
Anna Karenina and of <i>Fathers and Sons</i>.
</p>

<p>
Ashenden soon discovered that her husband was
quite unworthy of her and presently learned that she
shared his opinion.  Vladimir Semenovich was a little
man with a large, long head that looked as though it
had been pulled like a piece of liquorice, and he had
a great shock of unruly Russian hair.  He was a gentle,
unobtrusive creature and it was hard to believe that the
Czarist government had really feared his revolutionary
activities.  He taught Russian and wrote for papers in
Moscow.  He was amiable and obliging.  He needed
these qualities, for Anastasia Alexandrovna was a
woman of character: when she had a toothache Vladimir
Semenovich suffered the agonies of the damned and
when her heart was wrung by the suffering of her
unhappy country Vladimir Semenovich might well have
wished he had never been born.  Ashenden could not
help admitting that he was a poor thing, but he was so
harmless that he conceived quite a liking for him, and
when in due course he had disclosed his passion to
Anastasia Alexandrovna and to his joy found it was
returned he was puzzled to know what to do about
Vladimir Semenovich.  Neither Anastasia Alexandrovna
nor he felt that they could live another minute out of
one another's pockets, and Ashenden feared that with
her revolutionary views and all that she would never
consent to marry him; but somewhat to his surprise,
and very much to his relief, she accepted the suggestion
with alacrity.
</p>

<p>
"Would Vladimir Semenovich let himself be divorced,
do you think?" he asked, as he sat on the sofa, leaning
against cushions the colour of which reminded him of
raw meat just gone bad, and held her hand.
</p>

<p>
"Vladimir adores me," she answered.  "It'll break his
heart."
</p>

<p>
"He's a nice fellow, I shouldn't like him to be very
unhappy.  I hope he'll get over it."
</p>

<p>
"He'll never get over it.  That is the Russian spirit.
I know that when I leave him he'll feel that he has
lost everything that made life worth living for him.
I've never known anyone so wrapped up in a woman as
he is in me.  But of course he wouldn't want to stand in
the way of my happiness.  He's far too great for that.
He'll see that when it's a question of my own
self-development I haven't the right to hesitate.  Vladimir
will give me my freedom without question."
</p>

<p>
At that time the divorce law in England was even
more complicated and absurd than it is now and in case
she was not acquainted with its peculiarities Ashenden
explained to Anastasia Alexandrovna the difficulties of
the case.  She put her hand gently on his.
</p>

<p>
"Vladimir would never expose me to the vulgar
notoriety of the divorce court.  When I tell him that I
have decided to marry you he will commit suicide."
</p>

<p>
"That would be terrible," said Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
He was startled, but thrilled.  It was really very much
like a Russian novel and he saw the moving and
terrible pages, pages and pages, in which Dostoievsky
would have described the situation.  He knew the
lacerations his characters would have suffered, the
broken bottles of champagne, the visits to the gipsies,
the vodka, the swoonings, the catalepsy and the long,
long speeches everyone would have made.  It was all
very dreadful and wonderful and shattering.
</p>

<p>
"It would make us horribly unhappy," said Anastasia
Alexandrovna, "but I don't know what else he could
do.  I couldn't ask him to live without me.  He would
be like a ship without a rudder or a car without a
carburettor.  I know Vladimir so well.  He will commit
suicide."
</p>

<p>
"How?" asked Ashenden, who had the realist's
passion for the exact detail.
</p>

<p>
"He will blow his brains out."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden remembered <i>Rosmerholm</i>.  In his day he
had been an ardent Ibsenite and had even flirted with
the notion of learning Norwegian so that he might,
by reading the master in the original, get at the secret
essence of his thought.  He had once seen Ibsen in the
flesh drink a glass of Munich beer.
</p>

<p>
"But do you think we could ever pass another easy
hour if we had the death of that man on our conscience?"
he asked.  "I have a feeling that he would always be
between us."
</p>

<p>
"I know we shall suffer, we shall suffer dreadfully,"
said Anastasia Alexandrovna, "but how can we help
it?  Life is like that.  We must think of Vladimir.
There is his happiness to be considered too.  He will
prefer to commit suicide."
</p>

<p>
She turned her face away and Ashenden saw that
the heavy tears were coursing down her cheeks.  He
was much moved.  For he had a soft heart and it was
dreadful to think of poor Vladimir lying there with a
bullet in his brain.
</p>

<p>
These Russians, what fun they have!
</p>

<p>
But when Anastasia Alexandrovna had mastered
her emotion she turned to him gravely.  She looked
at him with her humid, round and slightly protuberant
eyes.
</p>

<p>
"We must be quite sure that we're doing the right
thing," she said.  "I should never forgive myself if I'd
allowed Vladimir to commit suicide and then found
I'd made a mistake.  I think we ought to make sure that
we really love one another."
</p>

<p>
"But don't you know?" exclaimed Ashenden in a
low, tense voice.  "I know."
</p>

<p>
"Let's go over to Paris for a week and see how we
get on.  Then we shall know."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden was a trifle conventional and the
suggestion took him by surprise.  But only for a
moment.  Anastasia was wonderful.  She was very
quick and she saw the hesitation that for an instant
troubled him.
</p>

<p>
"Surely you have no bourgeois prejudices?" she said.
</p>

<p>
"Of course not," he assured her hurriedly, for he
would much sooner have been thought knavish than
bourgeois, "I think it's a splendid idea."
</p>

<p>
"Why should a woman hazard her whole life on a
throw?  It's impossible to know what a man is really like
till you've lived with him.  It's only fair to give her the
opportunity to change her mind before it's too late."
</p>

<p>
"Quite so," said Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
Anastasia Alexandrovna was not a woman to let the
grass grow under her feet and so having made their
arrangements forthwith on the following Saturday they
started for Paris.
</p>

<p>
"I shall not tell Vladimir that I am going with you,"
she said.  "It would only distress him."
</p>

<p>
"It would be a pity to do that," said Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"And if at the end of the week I come to the
conclusion that we've made a mistake he need never know
anything about it."
</p>

<p>
"Quite so," said Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
They met at Victoria Station.
</p>

<p>
"What class have you got?" she asked him.
</p>

<p>
"First."
</p>

<p>
"I'm glad of that.  Father and Vladimir travel third on
account of their principles, but I always feel sick on a
train and I like to be able to lean my head on somebody's
shoulder.  It's easier in a first-class carriage."
</p>

<p>
When the train started Anastasia Alexandrovna
said she felt dizzy, so she took off her hat and leaned
her head on Ashenden's shoulder.  He put his arm
round her waist.
</p>

<p>
"Keep quite still, won't you?" she said.
</p>

<p>
When they got on to the boat she went down to
the ladies' cabin and at Calais was able to eat a very
hearty meal, but when they got into the train she took
off her hat again and rested her head on Ashenden's
shoulder.  He thought he would like to read and took
up a book.
</p>

<p>
"Do you mind not reading?" she said.  "I have to be
held and when you turn the pages it makes me feel all
funny."
</p>

<p>
Finally they reached Paris and went to a little hotel
on the Left Bank that Anastasia Alexandrovna knew of.
She said it had atmosphere.  She could not bear those
great big grand hotels on the other side; they were
hopelessly vulgar and bourgeois.
</p>

<p>
"I'll go anywhere you like," said Ashenden, "as long
as there's a bathroom."
</p>

<p>
She smiled and pinched his cheek.
</p>

<p>
"How adorably English you are.  Can't you do without
a bathroom for a week?  My dear, my dear, you have
so much to learn."
</p>

<p>
They talked far into the night about Maxim Gorki
and Karl Marx, human destiny, love and the brotherhood
of man; and drank innumerable cups of Russian
tea, so that in the morning Ashenden would willingly
have breakfasted in bed and got up for luncheon;
but Anastasia Alexandrovna was an early riser.  When
life was so short and there was so much to do it was a
sinful thing to have breakfast a minute after half-past
eight.  They sat down in a dingy little dining-room
the windows of which showed no signs of having been
opened for a month.  It was full of atmosphere.
Ashenden asked Anastasia Alexandrovna what she would
have for breakfast.
</p>

<p>
"Scrambled eggs," she said.
</p>

<p>
She ate heartily.  Ashenden had already noticed
that she had a healthy appetite.  He supposed it was a
Russian trait: you could not picture Anna Karenina
making her midday meal off a bath-bun and a cup of
coffee, could you?
</p>

<p>
After breakfast they went to the Louvre and in
the afternoon they went to the Luxembourg.  They
dined early in order to go to the Comédie Française;
then they went to a Russian cabaret where they danced.
When next morning at eight-thirty they took their
places in the dining-room and Ashenden asked
Anastasia Alexandrovna what she fancied, her reply was:
</p>

<p>
"Scrambled eggs."
</p>

<p>
"But we had scrambled eggs yesterday," he expostulated.
</p>

<p>
"Let's have them again to-day," she smiled.
</p>

<p>
"All right."
</p>

<p>
They spent the day in the same manner except that
they went to the Carnavalet instead of the Louvre and
the Musée Guimet instead of the Luxembourg.  But
when the morning after in answer to Ashenden's
enquiry Anastasia Alexandrovna again asked for
scrambled eggs, his heart sank.
</p>

<p>
"But we had scrambled eggs yesterday and the day
before," he said.
</p>

<p>
"Don't you think that's a very good reason to have
them again to-day?"
</p>

<p>
"No, I don't."
</p>

<p>
"Is it possible that your sense of humour is a little
deficient this morning?" she asked.  "I eat scrambled
eggs every day.  It's the only way I like them."
</p>

<p>
"Oh, very well.  In that case of course we'll have
scrambled eggs."
</p>

<p>
But the following morning he could not face them.
</p>

<p>
"Will you have scrambled eggs as usual?" he asked her.
</p>

<p>
"Of course," she smiled affectionately, showing him
two rows of large square teeth.
</p>

<p>
"All right, I'll order them for you; I shall have mine
fried."
</p>

<p>
The smile vanished from her lips.
</p>

<p>
"Oh?"  She paused a moment.  "Don't you think
that's rather inconsiderate?  Do you think it's fair to
give the cook unnecessary work?  You English, you're
all the same, you look upon servants as machines.  Does
it occur to you that they have hearts like yours, the
same feelings and the same emotions?  How can you be
surprised that the proletariat are seething with
discontent when the bourgeoisie like you are so monstrously
selfish?"
</p>

<p>
"Do you really think that there'll be a revolution in
England if I have my eggs in Paris fried rather than
scrambled?"
</p>

<p>
She tossed her pretty head in indignation.
</p>

<p>
"You don't understand.  It's the principle of the
thing.  You think it's a jest, of course I know you're
being funny, I can laugh at a joke as well as anyone,
Chekoff was well-known in Russia as a humorist; but
don't you see what is involved?  Your whole attitude
is wrong.  It's a lack of feeling.  You wouldn't talk
like that if you had been through the events of 1905
in Petersburg.  When I think of the crowds in front
of the Winter Palace kneeling in the snow while the
Cossacks charged them, women and children!  No, no, no."
</p>

<p>
Her eyes filled with tears and her face was all twisted
with pain.  She took Ashenden's hand.
</p>

<p>
"I know you have a good heart.  It was just thoughtless
on your part and we won't say anything more about
it.  You have imagination.  You're very sensitive.  I
know.  You'll have your eggs done in the same way as
mine, won't you?"
</p>

<p>
"Of course," said Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
He ate scrambled eggs for breakfast every morning
after that.  The waiter said: "<i>Monsieur aime les oeufs
breuillés</i>."  At the end of the week they returned to
London.  He held Anastasia Alexandrovna in his arms,
her head resting on his shoulder, from Paris to Calais
and again from Dover to London.  He reflected that the
journey from New York to San Francisco took five
days.  When they arrived at Victoria and stood on the
platform waiting for a cab she looked at him with her
round, shining and slightly protuberant eyes.
</p>

<p>
"We've had a wonderful time, haven't we?" she said.
</p>

<p>
"Wonderful."
</p>

<p>
"I've quite made up my mind.  The experiment
has justified itself.  I'm willing to marry you whenever
you like."
</p>

<p>
But Ashenden saw himself eating scrambled eggs
every morning for the rest of his life.  When he had
put her in a cab, he called another for himself, went
to the Cunard office and took a berth on the first ship
that was going to America.  No immigrant, eager for
freedom and a new life, ever looked upon the statue
of Liberty with more heartfelt thankfulness than did
Ashenden, when on that bright and sunny morning his
ship steamed into the harbour of New York.
</p>

<p><br /><br /><br /></p>

<p><a id="chap16"></a></p>

<h3>
XVI
<br /><br />
<i>Mr. Harrington's Washing</i>
</h3>

<p>
Some years had passed since then and
Ashenden had not seen Anastasia
Alexandrovna again.  He knew that on the
outbreak of the revolution in March she and
Vladimir Semenovich had gone to Russia.  It might be
that they would be able to help him, in a way Vladimir
Semenovich owed him his life, and he made up his mind
to write to Anastasia Alexandrovna to ask if he might
come to see her.
</p>

<p>
When Ashenden went down to lunch he felt somewhat
rested.  Mr. Harrington was waiting for him and
they sat down.  They ate what was put before them.
</p>

<p>
"Ask the waiter to bring us some bread," said
Mr. Harrington.
</p>

<p>
"Bread?" replied Ashenden.  "There's no bread."
</p>

<p>
"I can't eat without bread," said Mr. Harrington.
</p>

<p>
"I'm afraid you'll have to.  There's no bread, no
butter, no sugar, no eggs, no potatoes.  There's fish and
meat and green vegetables, and that's all."
</p>

<p>
Mr. Harrington's jaw dropped.
</p>

<p>
"But this is war," he said.
</p>

<p>
"It looks very much like it."
</p>

<p>
Mr. Harrington was for a moment speechless; then
he said: "I'll tell you what I'm going to do, I'm going
to get through with my business as quick as I can and
then I'm going to get out of this country.  I'm sure
Mrs. Harrington wouldn't like me to go without sugar or
butter.  I've got a very delicate stomach.  The firm
would never have sent me here if they'd thought I
wasn't going to have the best of everything."
</p>

<p>
In a little while Dr. Egan Orth came in and gave
Ashenden an envelope.  On it was written Anastasia
Alexandrovna's address.  He introduced him to
Mr. Harrington.  It was soon clear that he was pleased with
Dr. Egan Orth and so without further to-do he
suggested that here was the perfect interpreter for him.
</p>

<p>
"He talks Russian like a Russian.  But he's an
American citizen, so that he won't do you down.  I've
known him a considerable time and I can assure you
that he's absolutely trustworthy."
</p>

<p>
Mr. Harrington was pleased with the notion and after
luncheon Ashenden left them to settle the matter by
themselves.  He wrote a note to Anastasia Alexandrovna
and presently received an answer to say that she was
going to a meeting, but would look in at his hotel about
seven.  He awaited her with apprehension.  Of course he
knew now that he had not loved her, but Tolstoi and
Dostoievsky, Rimsky-Korsakoff, Stravinsky and Bakst;
but he was not quite sure if the point had occurred to
her.  When between eight and half-past she arrived he
suggested that she should join Mr. Harrington and him
at dinner.  The presence of a third party, he thought,
would prevent any awkwardness their meeting might
have; but he need not have had any anxiety, for five
minutes after they had sat down to a plate of soup it was
borne in upon him that the feelings of Anastasia
Alexandrovna towards him were as cool as were his
towards her.  It gave him a momentary shock.  It is very
hard for a man, however modest, to grasp the possibility
that a woman who has once loved him may love him no
longer, and though of course he did not imagine that
Anastasia Alexandrovna had languished for five years
with a hopeless passion for him, he did think that by a
heightening of colour, a flutter of the eyelashes, or a
quiver of the lips she would betray the fact that she had
still a soft place in her heart for him.  Not at all.  She
talked to him as though he were a friend she was very
glad to see again after an absence of a few days, but
whose intimacy with her was purely social.  He asked
after Vladimir Semenovich.
</p>

<p>
"He has been a disappointment to me," she said.  "I
never thought he was a clever man, but I thought he
was an honest one.  He's going to have a baby."
</p>

<p>
Mr. Harrington, who was about to put a piece offish
into his mouth, stopped, his fork in the air, and stared at
Anastasia Alexandrovna with astonishment.  In extenuation
it must be explained that he had never read a
Russian novel in his life.  Ashenden, slightly perplexed
too, gave her a questioning look.
</p>

<p>
"I'm not the mother," she said with a laugh.  "I am
not interested in that sort of thing.  The mother is a
friend of mine and a well-known writer on Political
Economy.  I do not think her views are sound, but I
should be the last to deny that they deserve consideration.
She has a good brain, quite a good brain."  She
turned to Mr. Harrington.  "Are you interested in
Political Economy?"
</p>

<p>
For once in his life Mr. Harrington was speechless.
Anastasia Alexandrovna gave them her views on the
subject and they began to speak on the situation in
Russia.  She seemed to be on intimate terms with the
leaders of the various political parties and Ashenden
made up his mind to sound her on the possibility of her
working with him.  His infatuation had not blinded him
to the fact that she was an extremely intelligent woman.
After dinner he told Mr. Harrington that he wished to
talk business with Anastasia Alexandrovna and took her
to a retired corner of the lounge.  He told her all he
thought necessary and found her interested and anxious
to help.  She had a passion for intrigue and a desire for
power.  When he hinted that he had command of large
sums of money she saw at once that through him she
might acquire an influence in the affairs of Russia.  It
tickled her vanity.  She was immensely patriotic, but like
many patriots she had an impression that her own
aggrandisement tended to the good of her country.
When they parted they had come to a working agreement.
</p>

<p>
"That was a very remarkable woman," said Mr. Harrington
next morning when they met at breakfast.
</p>

<p>
"Don't fall in love with her," smiled Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
This, however, was not a matter on which Mr. Harrington
was prepared to jest.
</p>

<p>
"I have never looked at a woman since I married
Mrs. Harrington," he said.  "That husband of hers must be a
bad man."
</p>

<p>
"I could do with a plate of scrambled eggs," said
Ashenden, irrelevantly, for their breakfast consisted of a
cup of tea without milk and a little jam instead of sugar.
</p>

<p>
With Anastasia Alexandrovna to help him and Dr. Orth
in the background, Ashenden set to work.  Things
in Russia were going from bad to worse.  Kerensky, the
head of the Provisional Government, was devoured by
vanity and dismissed any minister who gave evidence of
a capacity that might endanger his own position.  He
made speeches.  He made endless speeches.  At one
moment there was a possibility that the Germans would
make a dash for Petrograd.  Kerensky made speeches.
The food shortage grew more serious, the winter was
approaching and there was no fuel.  Kerensky made
speeches.  In the background the Bolsheviks were
active, Lenin was hiding in Petrograd, it was said that
Kerensky knew where he was, but dared not arrest him.
He made speeches.
</p>

<p>
It amused Ashenden to see the unconcern with which
Mr. Harrington wandered through this turmoil.  History
was in the making and Mr. Harrington minded his own
business.  It was uphill work.  He was made to pay bribes
to secretaries and underlings under the pretence that the
ear of great men would be granted to him.  He was kept
waiting for hours in antechambers and then sent away
without ceremony.  When at last he saw the great men
he found they had nothing to give him but idle words.
They made him promises and in a day or two he
discovered that the promises meant nothing.  Ashenden
advised him to throw in his hand and return to America;
but Mr. Harrington would not hear of it; his firm had
sent him to do a particular job, and, by gum, he was
going to do it or perish in the attempt.  Then Anastasia
Alexandrovna took him in hand.  A singular friendship
had arisen between the pair.  Mr. Harrington thought
her a very remarkable and deeply wronged woman; he
told her all about his wife and his two sons, he told her
all about the Constitution of the United States; she on
her side told him all about Vladimir Semenovich, and
she told him about Tolstoi, Turgenev and Dostoievsky.
They had great times together.  He said he couldn't
manage to call her Anastasia Alexandrovna, it was too
much of a mouthful; so he called her Delilah.  And now
she placed her inexhaustible energy at his service and
they went together to the persons who might be useful
to him.  But things were coming to a head.  Riots broke
out and the streets were growing dangerous.  Now and
then armoured cars filled with discontented reservists
careered wildly along the Nevsky Prospekt and in order
to show that they were not happy took pot-shots at the
passers-by.  On one occasion when Mr. Harrington and
Anastasia Alexandrovna were in a tram together shots
peppered the windows and they had to lie down on the
floor for safety.  Mr. Harrington was highly indignant.
</p>

<p>
"An old fat woman was lying right on top of me and
when I wriggled to get out Delilah caught me a clip on
the side of the head and said, 'Stop still, you fool.'  I
don't like your Russian ways, Delilah."
</p>

<p>
"Anyhow you stopped still," she giggled.
</p>

<p>
"What you want in this country is a little less art and a
little more civilisation."
</p>

<p>
"You are bourgeoisie, Mr. Harrington, you are not a
member of the intelligentsia."
</p>

<p>
"You are the first person who's ever said that, Delilah.
If I'm not a member of the intelligentsia I don't know
who is," retorted Mr. Harrington with dignity.
</p>

<p>
Then one day when Ashenden was working in his
room there was a knock at the door and Anastasia
Alexandrovna stalked in followed somewhat sheepishly
by Mr. Harrington.  Ashenden saw that she was excited.
</p>

<p>
"What's the matter?" he asked.
</p>

<p>
"Unless this man goes back to America he'll get
killed.  You really must talk to him.  If I hadn't been
there something very unpleasant might have happened
to him."
</p>

<p>
"Not at all, Delilah," said Mr. Harrington, with
asperity.  "I'm perfectly capable of taking care of myself
and I wasn't in the smallest danger."
</p>

<p>
"What is it all about?" asked Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"I'd taken Mr. Harrington to the Lavra of Alexander
Nevsky to see Dostoievsky's grave," said Anastasia
Alexandrovna, "and on our way back we saw a soldier
being rather rough with an old woman."
</p>

<p>
"Rather rough!" cried Mr. Harrington.  "There was
an old woman walking along the side-walk with a
basket of provisions on her arm.  Two soldiers came up
behind her and one of them snatched the basket from
her and walked off with it.  She burst out screaming and
crying, I don't know what she was saying, but I can
guess, and the other soldier took his gun and with the
butt-end of it hit her over the head.  Isn't that right,
Delilah?"
</p>

<p>
"Yes," she answered, unable to help smiling.  "And
before I could prevent it Mr. Harrington jumped out of
the cab and ran up to the soldier who had the basket,
wrenched it from him and began to abuse the pair of
them like pickpockets.  At first they were so taken
aback they didn't know what to do and then they got in
a rage.  I ran after Mr. Harrington and explained to
them that he was a foreigner and drunk."
</p>

<p>
"Drunk?" cried Mr. Harrington.
</p>

<p>
"Yes, drunk.  Of course a crowd collected.  It looked
as though it wasn't going to be very nice."
</p>

<p>
Mr. Harrington smiled with those large, pale-blue
eyes of his.
</p>

<p>
"It sounded to me as though you were giving them
a piece of your mind, Delilah.  It was as good as a play
to watch you."
</p>

<p>
"Don't be stupid, Mr. Harrington," cried Anastasia,
in a sudden fury, stamping her foot.  "Don't you know
that those soldiers might very easily have killed you and
me too, and not one of the bystanders would have
raised a finger to help us?"
</p>

<p>
"Me?  I'm an American citizen, Delilah.  They
wouldn't dare touch a hair of my head."
</p>

<p>
"They'd have difficulty in finding one," said Anastasia
Alexandrovna, who when she was in a temper had no
manners.  "But if you think Russian soldiers are going
to hesitate to kill you because you're an American
citizen you'll get a big surprise one of these days."
</p>

<p>
"Well, what happened to the old woman?" asked Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"The soldiers went off after a little and we went back
to her."
</p>

<p>
"Still with the basket?"
</p>

<p>
"Yes.  Mr. Harrington clung on to that like grim
death.  She was lying on the ground with the blood
pouring from her head.  We got her into the cab and
when she could speak enough to tell us where she
lived we drove her home.  She was bleeding dreadfully
and we had some difficulty in staunching the blood."
</p>

<p>
Anastasia Alexandrovna gave Mr. Harrington an odd
look and to his surprise Ashenden saw him turn scarlet.
</p>

<p>
"What's the matter now?"
</p>

<p>
"You see, we had nothing to bind her up with.
Mr. Harrington's handkerchief was soaked.  There was
only one thing about me that I could get off quickly and
so I took off my..."
</p>

<p>
But before she could finish Mr. Harrington interrupted her.
</p>

<p>
"You need not tell Mr. Ashenden what you took off.
I'm a married man and I know ladies wear them, but I
see no need to refer to them in general society."
</p>

<p>
Anastasia Alexandrovna giggled.
</p>

<p>
"Then you must kiss me, Mr. Harrington.  If you
don't I shall say."
</p>

<p>
Mr. Harrington hesitated a moment, considering
evidently the pros and cons of the matter, but he saw
that Anastasia Alexandrovna was determined.
</p>

<p>
"Go on then, you may kiss me, Delilah, though I'm
bound to say I don't see what pleasure it can be to
you."
</p>

<p>
She put her arms round his neck and kissed him on
both cheeks, then without a word of warning burst into
a flood of tears.
</p>

<p>
"You're a brave little man, Mr. Harrington.  You're
absurd but magnificent," she sobbed.
</p>

<p>
Mr. Harrington was less surprised than Ashenden
would have expected him to be.  He looked at Anastasia
with a thin, quizzical smile and gently patted her.
</p>

<p>
"Come, come, Delilah, pull yourself together.  It gave
you a nasty turn, didn't it?  You're quite upset.  I shall
have terrible rheumatism in my shoulder if you go on
weeping all over it."
</p>

<p>
The scene was ridiculous and touching.  Ashenden
laughed, but he had the beginnings of a lump in his
throat.
</p>

<p>
When Anastasia Alexandrovna had left them Mr. Harrington
sat in a brown study.
</p>

<p>
"They're very queer, these Russians.  Do you know
what Delilah did?" he said, suddenly.  "She stood up in
the cab, in the middle of the street, with people passing
on both sides, and took her pants off.  She tore them in
two and gave me one to hold while she made a bandage
of the other.  I was never so embarrassed in my life."
</p>

<p>
"Tell me what gave you the idea of calling her
Delilah?" smiled Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
Mr. Harrington reddened a little.
</p>

<p>
"She's a very fascinating woman, Mr. Ashenden.
She's been deeply wronged by her husband and I
naturally felt a great deal of sympathy for her.  These
Russians are very emotional people and I did not want
her to mistake my sympathy for anything else.  I told her
I was very much attached to Mrs. Harrington."
</p>

<p>
"You're not under the impression that Delilah was
Potiphar's wife?" asked Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"I don't know what you mean by that, Mr. Ashenden,"
replied Mr. Harrington.  "Mrs. Harrington has
always given me to understand that I'm very fascinating
to women, and I thought if I called our little friend
Delilah it would make my position quite clear."
</p>

<p>
"I don't think Russia's any place for you, Mr. Harrington,"
said Ashenden smiling.  "If I were you
I'd get out of it as quick as I could."
</p>

<p>
"I can't go now.  I've got them to agree to my terms
at last and we're going to sign next week.  Then I shall
pack my grip and go."
</p>

<p>
"I wonder if your signatures will be worth the paper
they're written on," said Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
He had at length devised a plan of campaign.  It took
him twenty-four hours' hard work to code a telegram in
which he put his scheme before the persons who had
sent him to Petrograd.  It was accepted and he was
promised all the money he needed.  Ashenden knew he
could do nothing unless the Provisional Government
remained in power for another three months; but winter
was at hand and food was getting scarcer every day.
The army was mutinous.  The people clamoured for
peace.  Every evening at the Europe Ashenden drank a
cup of chocolate with Professor Z. and discussed with
him how best to make use of his devoted Czechs.
Anastasia Alexandrovna had a flat in a retired spot and
here he had meetings with all manner of persons.  Plans
were drawn up.  Measures were taken.  Ashenden
argued, persuaded, promised.  He had to overcome the
vacillation of one and wrestle with the fatalism of
another.  He had to judge who was resolute and who was
self-sufficient, who was honest and who was infirm of
purpose.  He had to curb his impatience with the
Russian verbosity; he had to be good-tempered with
people who were willing to talk of everything but the
matter in hand; he had to listen sympathetically to
ranting and rhodomontade.  He had to beware of treachery.
He had to humour the vanity of fools and elude the
greed of the ambitious.  Time was pressing.  The
rumours grew hot and many of the activities of the
Bolsheviks.  Kerensky ran hither and thither like a
frightened hen.
</p>

<p>
Then the blow fell.  On the night of November 7th,
1917, the Bolsheviks rose, Kerensky's ministers were
arrested and the Winter Palace was sacked by the mob;
the reins of power were seized by Lenin and Trotsky.
</p>

<p>
Anastasia Alexandrovna came to Ashenden's room at
the hotel early in the morning.  Ashenden was coding a
telegram.  He had been up all night, first at the Smolny,
and then at the Winter Palace.  He was tired out.  Her
face was white and her shining brown eyes were tragic.
</p>

<p>
"Have you heard?" she asked Ashenden
</p>

<p>
He nodded.
</p>

<p>
"It's all over then.  They say Kerensky has fled.
They never even showed fight."  Rage seized her.  "The
buffoon!" she screamed.
</p>

<p>
At that moment there was a knock at the door and
Anastasia Alexandrovna looked at it with sudden
apprehension.
</p>

<p>
"You know the Bolsheviks have got a list of people
they've decided to execute.  My name is on it, and it may
be that yours is too."
</p>

<p>
"If it's they and they want to come in they only have
to turn the handle," said Ashenden, smiling, but with
ever so slightly odd a feeling at the pit of his stomach.
"Come in."
</p>

<p>
The door was opened and Mr. Harrington stepped
into the room.  He was as dapper as ever, in his short
black coat and striped trousers, his shoes neatly polished
and a derby on his bald head.  He took it off when he
saw Anastasia Alexandrovna.
</p>

<p>
"Oh, fancy finding you here so early.  I looked in on
my way out, I wanted to tell you my news.  I tried to
find you yesterday evening, but couldn't.  You didn't
come in to dinner."
</p>

<p>
"No, I was at a meeting," said Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"You must both congratulate me, I got my signatures
yesterday, and my business is done."
</p>

<p>
Mr. Harrington beamed on them, the picture of
self-satisfaction, and he arched himself like a bantam-cock
who has chased away all rivals.  Anastasia Alexandrovna
burst into a sudden shriek of hysterical laughter.  He
stared at her in perplexity.
</p>

<p>
"Why, Delilah, what is the matter?" he said.
</p>

<p>
Anastasia laughed till the tears ran from her eyes and
then began to sob in earnest.  Ashenden explained.
</p>

<p>
"The Bolsheviks have overthrown the Government.
Kerensky's ministers are in prison.  The Bolsheviks are
out to kill.  Delilah says her name is on the list.  Your
minister signed your documents yesterday because he
knew it did not matter what he did then.  Your contracts
are worth nothing.  The Bolsheviks are going to make
peace with Germany as soon as they can."
</p>

<p>
Anastasia Alexandrovna had recovered her self-control
as quickly as she had lost it.
</p>

<p>
"You had better get out of Russia as soon as you can,
Mr. Harrington.  It's no place for a foreigner now and it
may be that in a few days you won't be able to."
</p>

<p>
Mr. Harrington looked from one to the other.
</p>

<p>
"O my!" he said.  "O my!"  It seemed inadequate.
"Are you going to tell me that that Russian minister was
just making a fool of me?"
</p>

<p>
Ashenden shrugged his shoulders.
</p>

<p>
"How can one tell what he was thinking of?  He may
have a keen sense of humour and perhaps he thought it
funny to sign a fifty-million-dollar contract yesterday
when there was every chance of his being stood against
the wall and shot to-day.  Anastasia Alexandrovna's
right, Mr. Harrington, you'd better take the first train
that'll get you to Sweden."
</p>

<p>
"And what about you?"
</p>

<p>
"There's nothing for me to do here any more.  I'm
cabling for instructions and I shall go as soon as I get
leave.  The Bolsheviks have got in ahead of us and the
people I was working with will have their work cut out
to save their lives."
</p>

<p>
"Boris Petrovich was shot this morning," said
Anastasia Alexandrovna with a frown.
</p>

<p>
They both looked at Mr. Harrington and he stared at
the floor.  His pride in this achievement of his was
shattered and he sagged like a pricked balloon.  But in a
minute he looked up.  He gave Anastasia Alexandrovna
a little smile and for the first time Ashenden noticed how
attractive and kindly his smile was.  There was something
peculiarly disarming about it.
</p>

<p>
"If the Bolsheviks are after you, Delilah, don't you
think you'd better come with me?  I'll take care of you
and if you like to come to America I'm sure
Mrs. Harrington would be glad to do anything she could for
you."
</p>

<p>
"I can see Mrs. Harrington's face if you arrived in
Philadelphia with a Russian refugee," laughed Anastasia
Alexandrovna.  "I'm afraid it would need more explaining
than you could ever manage.  No, I shall stay here."
</p>

<p>
"But if you're in danger?"
</p>

<p>
"I'm a Russian.  My place is here.  I will not leave my
country when most my country needs me."
</p>

<p>
"That is the bunk, Delilah," said Mr. Harrington
very quietly.
</p>

<p>
Anastasia Alexandrovna had spoken with deep
emotion, but now with a little start she shot a sudden
quizzical look at him.
</p>

<p>
"I know it is, Samson," she answered.  "To tell you
the truth I think we're all going to have a hell of a time,
God knows what's going to happen, but I want to see; I
wouldn't miss a minute of it for the world."
</p>

<p>
Mr. Harrington shook his head.
</p>

<p>
"Curiosity is the bane of your sex, Delilah," he said.
</p>

<p>
"Go along and do your packing, Mr. Harrington,"
said Ashenden, smiling, "and then we'll take you to the
station.  The train will be besieged."
</p>

<p>
"Very well, I'll go.  And I shan't be sorry either.  I
haven't had a decent meal since I came here and I've
done a thing I never thought I should have to do in my
life, I've drunk my coffee without sugar and when I've
been lucky enough to get a little piece of black bread I've
had to eat it without butter.  Mrs. Harrington will never
believe me when I tell her what I've gone through.
What this country wants is organisation."
</p>

<p>
When he left them Ashenden and Anastasia Alexandrovna
talked over the situation.  Ashenden was
depressed because all his careful schemes had come to
nothing, but Anastasia Alexandrovna was excited and
she hazarded every sort of guess about the outcome of
this new revolution.  She pretended to be very serious,
but in her heart she looked upon it all very much as a
thrilling play.  She wanted more and more things to
happen.  Then there was another knock at the door and
before Ashenden could answer Mr. Harrington burst in.
</p>

<p>
"Really the service at this hotel is a scandal," he cried
heatedly.  "I've been ringing my bell for fifteen minutes
and I can't get anyone to pay the smallest attention to me."
</p>

<p>
"Service?" exclaimed Anastasia Alexandrovna.
"There is not a servant left in the hotel."
</p>

<p>
"But I want my washing.  They promised to let me
have it back last night."
</p>

<p>
"I'm afraid you haven't got much chance of getting it
now," said Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"I'm not going to leave without my washing.  Four
shirts, two union suits, a pair of pyjamas, and four
collars.  I wash my handkerchiefs and socks in my room.
I want my washing and I'm not going to leave this
hotel without it."
</p>

<p>
"Don't be a fool," cried Ashenden.  "What you've
got to do is to get out of here while the going's good.
If there are no servants to get it you'll just have to leave
your washing behind you."
</p>

<p>
"Pardon me, sir, I shall do nothing of the kind.  I'll go
and fetch it myself.  I've suffered enough at the hands of
this country and I'm not going to leave four perfectly
good shirts to be worn by a lot of dirty Bolsheviks.  No,
sir.  I do not leave Russia till I have my washing."
</p>

<p>
Anastasia Alexandrovna stared at the floor for a
moment; then with a little smile looked up.  It seemed to
Ashenden that there was something in her that responded
to Mr. Harrington's futile obstinacy.  In her
Russian way she understood that Mr. Harrington could
not leave Petrograd without his washing.  His insistence
had given it the value of a symbol.
</p>

<p>
"I'll go downstairs and see if I can find anybody
about who knows where the laundry is and if I can, I'll
go with you and you can bring your washing away with you."
</p>

<p>
Mr. Harrington unbent.  He answered with that
sweet and disarming smile of his.
</p>

<p>
"That's terribly kind of you, Delilah.  I don't mind
if it's ready or not, I'll take it just as it is."
</p>

<p>
Anastasia Alexandrovna left them.
</p>

<p>
"Well, what do you think of Russia and the Russians
now?" Mr. Harrington asked Ashenden.
</p>

<p>
"I'm fed up with them.  I'm fed up with Tolstoi, I'm
fed up with Turgenev and Dostoievsky, I'm fed up with
Chekoff.  I'm fed up with the Intelligentsia.  I hanker
after people who know their mind from one minute to
another, who mean what they say an hour after they've
said it, whose word you can rely on; I'm sick of fine
phrases, and oratory and attitudinising."
</p>

<p>
Ashenden, bitten by the prevailing ill, was about to
make a speech when he was interrupted by a rattle as
of peas on a drum.  In the city, so strangely silent, it
sounded abrupt and odd.
</p>

<p>
"What's that?" asked Mr. Harrington.
</p>

<p>
"Rifle firing.  On the other side of the river, I should
think."
</p>

<p>
Mr. Harrington gave a funny little look.  He laughed,
but his face was a trifle pale; he did not like it, and
Ashenden did not blame him.
</p>

<p>
"I think it's high time I got out.  I shouldn't so much
mind for myself, but I've got a wife and children to
think of.  I haven't had a letter from Mrs. Harrington
for so long I'm a bit worried."  He paused an instant.
"I'd like you to know Mrs. Harrington, she's a very
wonderful woman.  She's the best wife a man ever had.
Until I came here I'd not been separated from her for
more than three days since we were married."
</p>

<p>
Anastasia Alexandrovna came back and told them
that she had found the address.
</p>

<p>
"It's about forty minutes' walk from here and if
you'll come now I'll go with you," she said.
</p>

<p>
"I'm ready."
</p>

<p>
"You'd better look out," said Ashenden.  "I don't
believe the streets are very healthy to-day."
</p>

<p>
Anastasia Alexandrovna looked at Mr. Harrington.
</p>

<p>
"I must have my washing, Delilah," he said.  "I
should never rest in peace if I left it behind me and
Mrs. Harrington would never let me hear the last of it."
</p>

<p>
"Come on then."
</p>

<p>
They set out and Ashenden went on with the dreary
business of translating into a very complicated code the
shattering news he had to give.  It was a long message,
and then he had to ask for instructions upon his own
movements.  It was a mechanical job and yet it was one
in which you could not allow your attention to wander.
The mistake of a single figure might make a whole
sentence incomprehensible.
</p>

<p>
Suddenly his door was burst open and Anastasia
Alexandrovna flung into the room.  She had lost her hat
and was dishevelled.  She was panting.  Her eyes were
starting out of her head and she was obviously in a state
of great excitement.
</p>

<p>
"Where's Mr. Harrington?" she cried.  "Isn't he here?"
</p>

<p>
"No."
</p>

<p>
"Is he in his bedroom?"
</p>

<p>
"I don't know.  Why, what's the matter?  We'll go
and look if you like.  Why didn't you bring him along
with you?"
</p>

<p>
They walked down the passage and knocked at
Mr. Harrington's door; there was no answer; they tried the
handle; the door was locked.
</p>

<p>
"He's not there."
</p>

<p>
They went back to Ashenden's room.  Anastasia
Alexandrovna sank into a chair.
</p>

<p>
"Give me a glass of water, will you?  I'm out of
breath.  I've been running."
</p>

<p>
She drank the water Ashenden poured out for her.
She gave a sudden sob.
</p>

<p>
"I hope he's all right.  I should never forgive myself
if he was hurt.  I was hoping he would have got here
before me.  He got his washing all right.  We found the
place.  There was only an old woman there and they
didn't want to let us take it, but we insisted.
Mr. Harrington was furious because it hadn't been touched.
It was exactly as he had sent it.  They'd promised it last
night and it was still in the bundle that Mr. Harrington
had made himself.  I said that was Russia and
Mr. Harrington said he preferred coloured people.  I'd led
him by side streets because I thought it was better, and
we started to come back again.  We passed at the top
of a street and at the bottom of it I saw a little crowd.
There was a man addressing them.
</p>

<p>
"'Let's go and hear what he's saying,' I said.
</p>

<p>
"I could see they were arguing.  It looked exciting.
I wanted to know what was happening.
</p>

<p>
"'Come along, Delilah,' he said.  'Let us mind out
own business.'
</p>

<p>
"'You go back to the hotel and do your packing.
I'm going to see the fun,' I said.
</p>

<p>
"I ran down the street and he followed me.  There
were about two or three hundred people there and a
student was addressing them.  There were some working
men and they were shouting at him.  I love a row and I
edged my way into the crowd.  Suddenly we heard the
sound of shots and before you could realise what was
happening two armoured cars came dashing down the
street.  There were soldiers in them and they were firing
as they went.  I don't know why.  For fun, I suppose, or
because they were drunk.  We all scattered like a lot of
rabbits.  We just ran for our lives.  I lost Mr. Harrington.
I can't make out why he isn't here.  Do you think
something has happened to him?"
</p>

<p>
Ashenden was silent for a while.
</p>

<p>
"We'd better go out and look for him," he said.
"I don't know why the devil he couldn't leave his
washing."
</p>

<p>
"I understand, I understand so well."
</p>

<p>
"That's a comfort," said Ashenden irritably.  "Let's go."
</p>

<p>
He put on his hat and coat, and they walked downstairs.
The hotel seemed strangely empty.  They went
out into the street.  There was hardly anyone to be seen.
They walked along.  The trams were not running and
the silence in the great city was uncanny.  The shops
were closed.  It was quite startling when a motor-car
dashed by at breakneck speed.  The people they passed
looked frightened and downcast.  When they had to go
through a main thoroughfare they hastened their steps.
A lot of people were there and they stood about
irresolutely as though they did not know what to do next.
Reservists in their shabby grey were walking down the
middle of the roadway in little bunches.  They did not
speak.  They looked like sheep looking for their
shepherd.  Then they came to the street down which
Anastasia Alexandrovna had run, but they entered it
from the opposite end.  A number of windows had been
broken by the wild shooting.  It was quite empty.  You
could see where the people had scattered, for strewn
about were articles they had dropped in their haste,
books, a man's hat, a lady's bag and a basket.  Anastasia
Alexandrovna touched Ashenden's arm to draw his
attention: sitting on the pavement, her head bent right
down to her lap, was a woman and she was dead.  A
little way on two men had fallen together.  They were
dead too.  The wounded, one supposed, had managed
to drag themselves away or their friends had carried
them.  Then they found Mr. Harrington.  His derby had
rolled in the gutter.  He lay on his face, in a pool of
blood, his bald head, with its prominent bones, very
white; his neat black coat smeared and muddy.  But his
hand was clenched tight on the parcel that contained
four shirts, two union suits, a pair of pyjamas and four
collars.  Mr. Harrington had not let his washing go.
</p>
