<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>The Hairless Mexican</h2>
			<p>“Do you like macaroni?” said R.</p>
			<p>“What do you mean by macaroni?” answered Ashenden. “It is like asking me if I like poetry. I like Keats and Wordsworth and Verlaine and Goethe. When you say macaroni, do you mean <i>spaghetti, tagliatelli, rigatoni, vermicelli, fettucini, tufali, farfalli</i>, or just macaroni?”</p>
			<p>“Macaroni,” replied R., a man of few words.</p>
			<p>“I like all simple things, boiled eggs, oysters and caviar, <i>truite au bleu</i>, grilled salmon, roast lamb (the saddle by preference), cold grouse, treacle tart and rice pudding. But of all simple things the only one I can eat day in and day out, not only without disgust but with the eagerness of an appetite unimpaired by excess, is macaroni.”</p>
			<p>“I am glad of that because I want you to go down to Italy.”</p>
			<p>Ashenden had come from Geneva to meet R. at Lyons and having got there before him had spent the afternoon wandering about the dull, busy and prosaic streets of that thriving city. They were sitting now in a restaurant on the <i>place</i> to which Ashenden had taken R. on his arrival because it was reputed to give you the best food in that part of France. But since in so crowded a resort (for the Lyonese like a good dinner) you never knew what inquisitive ears were pricked up to catch any useful piece of information that might fall from your lips, they had contented themselves with talking of indifferent things. They had reached the end of an admirable repast.</p>
			<p>“Have another glass of brandy?” said R.</p>
			<p>“No, thank you,” answered Ashenden, who was of an abstemious turn.</p>
			<p>“One should do what one can to mitigate the rigours of war,” remarked R. as he took the bottle and poured out a glass for himself and another for Ashenden.</p>
			<p>Ashenden, thinking it would be affectation to protest, let the gesture pass, but felt bound to remonstrate with his chief on the unseemly manner in which he held the bottle.</p>
			<p>“In my youth I was always taught that you should take a woman by the waist and a bottle by the neck,” he murmured.</p>
			<p>“I am glad you told me. I shall continue to hold a bottle by the waist and give women a wide berth.”</p>
			<p>Ashenden did not know what to reply to this and so remained silent. He sipped his brandy and R. called for his bill. It was true that he was an important person, with power to make or mar quite a large number of his fellows, and his opinions were listened to by those who held in their hands the fate of empires; but he could never face the business of tipping a waiter without an embarrassment that was obvious in his demeanour. He was tortured by the fear of making a fool of himself by giving too much or of exciting the waiter’s icy scorn by giving too little. When the bill came he passed some hundred-franc notes over to Ashenden and said:</p>
			<p>“Pay him, will you? I can never understand French figures.”</p>
			<p>The groom brought them their hats and coats.</p>
			<p>“Would you like to go back to the hotel?” asked Ashenden.</p>
			<p>“We might as well.”</p>
			<p>It was early in the year, but the weather had suddenly turned warm, and they walked with their coats over their arms. Ashenden knowing that R. liked a sitting-room had engaged one for him and to this, when they reached the hotel, they went. The hotel was old-fashioned and the sitting-room was vast. It was furnished with a heavy mahogany suite upholstered in green velvet and the chairs were set primly round a large table. On the walls, covered with a dingy paper, were large steel engravings of the battles of Napoleon, and from the ceiling hung an enormous chandelier once used for gas, but now fitted with electric bulbs. It flooded the cheerless room with a cold, hard light.</p>
			<p>“This is very nice,” said R., as they went in.</p>
			<p>“Not exactly cosy,” suggested Ashenden.</p>
			<p>“No, but it looks as though it were the best room in the place. It all looks very <i>good</i> to me.”</p>
			<p>He drew one of the green velvet chairs away from the table and, sitting down, lit a cigar. He loosened his belt and unbuttoned his tunic.</p>
			<p>“I always thought I liked a cheroot better than anything,” he said, “but since the war I’ve taken quite a fancy to Havanas. Oh, well, I suppose it can’t last forever.” The corners of his mouth flickered with the beginning of a smile. “It’s an ill wind that blows nobody any good.”</p>
			<p>Ashenden took two chairs, one to sit on and one for his feet, and when R. saw him he said: “That’s not a bad idea,” and swinging another chair out from the table with a sigh of relief put his boots on it.</p>
			<p>“What room is that next door?” he asked.</p>
			<p>“That’s your bedroom.”</p>
			<p>“And on the other side?”</p>
			<p>“A banqueting hall.”</p>
			<p>R. got up and strolled slowly about the room and when he passed the windows, as though in idle curiosity, peeped through the heavy rep curtains that covered them, and then returning to his chair once more comfortably put his feet up.</p>
			<p>“It’s just as well not to take any more risk than one need,” he said.</p>
			<p>He looked at Ashenden reflectively. There was a slight smile on his thin lips, but the pale eyes too closely set together, remained cold and steely. R.’s stare would have been embarrassing if Ashenden had not been used to it. He knew that R. was considering how he would broach the subject that he had in mind. The silence must have lasted for two or three minutes.</p>
			<p>“I’m expecting a fellow to come and see me tonight,” he said at last. “His train gets in about ten.” He gave his wristwatch a glance. “He’s known as the Hairless Mexican.”</p>
			<p>“Why?”</p>
			<p>“Because he’s hairless and because he’s a Mexican.”</p>
			<p>“The explanation seems perfectly satisfactory,” said Ashenden.</p>
			<p>“He’ll tell you all about himself. He talks nineteen to the dozen. He was on his uppers when I came across him. It appears that he was mixed up in some revolution in Mexico and had to get out with nothing but the clothes he stood up in. They were rather the worse for wear when I found him. If you want to please him you call him General. He claims to have been a general in Huerta’s army, at least I think it was Huerta; anyhow he says that if things had gone right he would be minister of war now and no end of a big bug. I’ve found him very useful. Not a bad chap. The only thing I really have against him is that he will use scent.”</p>
			<p>“And where do I come in?” asked Ashenden.</p>
			<p>“He’s going down to Italy. I’ve got rather a ticklish job for him to do and I want you to stand by. I’m not keen on trusting him with a lot of money. He’s a gambler and he’s a bit too fond of the girls. I suppose you came from Geneva on your Ashenden passport.”</p>
			<p>“Yes.”</p>
			<p>“I’ve got another for you, a diplomatic one, by the way, in the name of Somerville with visas for France and Italy. I think you and he had better travel together. He’s an amusing cove when he gets going, and I think you ought to get to know one another.”</p>
			<p>“What is the job?”</p>
			<p>“I haven’t yet quite made up my mind how much it’s desirable for you to know about it.”</p>
			<p>Ashenden did not reply. They eyed one another in a detached manner, as though they were strangers who sat together in a railway carriage and each wondered who and what the other was.</p>
			<p>“In your place I’d leave the General to do most of the talking. I wouldn’t tell him more about yourself than you find absolutely necessary. He won’t ask you any questions, I can promise you that, I think he’s by way of being a gentleman after his own fashion.”</p>
			<p>“By the way, what is his real name?”</p>
			<p>“I always call him Manuel, I don’t know that he likes it very much, his name is Manuel Carmona.”</p>
			<p>“I gather by what you have not said that he’s an unmitigated scoundrel.”</p>
			<p>R. smiled with his pale blue eyes.</p>
			<p>“I don’t know that I’d go quite so far as that. He hasn’t had the advantages of a public-school education. His ideas of playing the game are not quite the same as yours or mine. I don’t know that I’d leave a gold cigarette-case about when he was in the neighbourhood, but if he lost money to you at poker and had pinched your cigarette-case he would immediately pawn it to pay you. If he had half a chance he’d seduce your wife, but if you were up against it he’d share his last crust with you. The tears will run down his face when he hears Gounod’s ’Ave Maria’ on the gramophone, but if you insult his dignity he’ll shoot you like a dog. It appears that in Mexico it’s an insult to get between a man and his drink and he told me himself that once when a Dutchman who didn’t know passed between him and the bar he whipped out his revolver and shot him dead.”</p>
			<p>“Did nothing happen to him?”</p>
			<p>“No, it appears that he belongs to one of the best families. The matter was hushed up and it was announced in the papers that the Dutchman had committed suicide. He did practically. I don’t believe the Hairless Mexican has a great respect for human life.”</p>
			<p>Ashenden who had been looking intently at R. started a little and he watched more carefully than ever his chief’s tired, lined and yellow face. He knew that he did not make this remark for nothing.</p>
			<p>“Of course a lot of nonsense is talked about the value of human life. You might just as well say that the counters you use at poker have an intrinsic value, their value is what you like to make it; for a general giving battle, men are merely counters and he’s a fool if he allows himself for sentimental reasons to look upon them as human beings.”</p>
			<p>“But, you see, they’re counters that feel and think and if they believe they’re being squandered they are quite capable of refusing to be used any more.”</p>
			<p>“Anyhow, that’s neither here nor there. We’ve had information that a man called Constantine Andreadi is on his way from Constantinople with certain documents that we want to get hold of. He’s a Greek. He’s an agent of Enver Pasha and Enver has great confidence in him. He’s given him verbal messages that are too secret and too important to be put on paper. He’s sailing from the Piræus, on a boat called the <i>Ithaca</i>, and will land at Brindisi on his way to Rome. He’s to deliver his dispatches at the German embassy and impart what he has to say personally to the ambassador.”</p>
			<p>“I see.”</p>
			<p>At this time Italy was still neutral; the Central Powers were straining every nerve to keep her so; the Allies were doing what they could to induce her to declare war on their side.</p>
			<p>“We don’t want to get into any trouble with the Italian authorities, it might be fatal, but we’ve got to prevent Andreadi from getting to Rome.”</p>
			<p>“At any cost?” asked Ashenden.</p>
			<p>“Money’s no object,” answered R., his lips twisting into a sardonic smile.</p>
			<p>“What do you propose to do?”</p>
			<p>“I don’t think you need bother your head about that.”</p>
			<p>“I have a fertile imagination,” said Ashenden.</p>
			<p>“I want you to go down to Naples with the Hairless Mexican. He’s very keen on getting back to Cuba. It appears that his friends are organising a show and he wants to be as near at hand as possible so that he can hop over to Mexico when things are ripe. He needs cash. I’ve brought money down with me, in American dollars, and I shall give it to you tonight. You’d better carry it on your person.”</p>
			<p>“Is it much?”</p>
			<p>“It’s a good deal, but I thought it would be easier for you if it wasn’t bulky, so I’ve got it in thousand-dollar notes. You will give the Hairless Mexican the notes in return for the documents that Andreadi is bringing.”</p>
			<p>A question sprang to Ashenden’s lips, but he did not ask it. He asked another instead.</p>
			<p>“Does this fellow understand what he has to do?”</p>
			<p>“Perfectly.”</p>
			<p>There was a knock at the door. It opened and the Hairless Mexican stood before them.</p>
			<p>“I have arrived. Good evening, Colonel. I am enchanted to see you.”</p>
			<p>R. got up.</p>
			<p>“Had a nice journey, Manuel? This is <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Somerville, who’s going to Naples with you, General Carmona.”</p>
			<p>“Pleased to meet you, sir.”</p>
			<p>He shook Ashenden’s hand with such force that he winced.</p>
			<p>“Your hands are like iron, General,” he murmured.</p>
			<p>The Mexican gave them a glance.</p>
			<p>“I had them manicured this morning. I do not think they were very well done. I like my nails much more highly polished.”</p>
			<p>They were cut to a point, stained bright red, and to Ashenden’s mind shone like mirrors. Though it was not cold the General wore a fur coat with an astrakhan collar and with his every movement a wave of perfume was wafted to your nose.</p>
			<p>“Take off your coat, General, and have a cigar,” said R.</p>
			<p>The Hairless Mexican was a tall man, and though thinnish gave you the impression of being very powerful; he was smartly dressed in a blue serge suit, with a silk handkerchief neatly tucked in the breast pocket of his coat, and he wore a gold bracelet on his wrist. His features were good, but a little larger than life-size, and his eyes were brown and lustrous. He was quite hairless. His yellow skin had the smoothness of a woman’s and he had no eyebrows nor eyelashes; he wore a pale brown wig, rather long, and the locks were arranged in artistic disorder. This and the unwrinkled sallow face, combined with his dandified dress, gave him an appearance that was at first glance a trifle horrifying. He was repulsive and ridiculous, but you could not take your eyes from him. There was a sinister fascination in his strangeness.</p>
			<p>He sat down and hitched up his trousers so that they should not bag at the knee.</p>
			<p>“Well, Manuel, have you been breaking any hearts today?” said R. with his sardonic joviality.</p>
			<p>The General turned to Ashenden.</p>
			<p>“Our good friend, the Colonel, envies me my successes with the fair sex. I tell him he can have just as many as I if he will only listen to me. Confidence, that is all you need. If you never fear a rebuff you will never have one.”</p>
			<p>“Nonsense, Manuel, one has to have your way with the girls. There’s something about you that they can’t resist.”</p>
			<p>The Hairless Mexican laughed with a self-satisfaction that he did not try to disguise. He spoke English very well, with a Spanish accent, but with an American intonation.</p>
			<p>“But since you ask me, Colonel, I don’t mind telling you that I got into conversation on the train with a little woman who was coming to Lyons to see her mother-in-law. She was not very young and she was thinner than I like a woman to be, but she was possible, and she helped me to pass an agreeable hour.”</p>
			<p>“Well, let’s get to business,” said R.</p>
			<p>“I am at your service, Colonel.” He gave Ashenden a glance. “Is <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Somerville a military man?”</p>
			<p>“No,” said R., “he’s an author.”</p>
			<p>“It takes all sorts to make a world, as you say. I am happy to make your acquaintance, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Somerville. I can tell you many stories that will interest you; I am sure that we shall get on well together. You have a sympathetic air. I am very sensitive to that. To tell you the truth I am nothing but a bundle of nerves and if I am with a person who is antipathetic to me I go all to pieces.”</p>
			<p>“I hope we shall have a pleasant journey,” said Ashenden.</p>
			<p>“When does our friend arrive at Brindisi?” asked the Mexican, turning to R.</p>
			<p>“He sails from the Piræus in the <i>Ithaca</i> on the fourteenth. It’s probably some old tub, but you’d better get down to Brindisi in good time.”</p>
			<p>“I agree with you.”</p>
			<p>R. got up and with his hands in his pockets sat on the edge of the table. In his rather shabby uniform, his tunic unbuttoned, he looked a slovenly creature beside the neat and well-dressed Mexican.</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Somerville knows practically nothing of the errand on which you are going and I do not desire you to tell him anything. I think you had much better keep your own counsel. He is instructed to give you the funds you need for your work, but your actions are your own affair. If you need his advice of course you can ask for it.”</p>
			<p>“I seldom ask other people’s advice and never take it.”</p>
			<p>“And should you make a mess of things I trust you to keep <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Somerville out of it. He must on no account be compromised.”</p>
			<p>“I am a man of honour, Colonel,” answered the Hairless Mexican with dignity, “and I would sooner let myself be cut in a thousand pieces than betray my friends.”</p>
			<p>“That is what I have already told <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Somerville. On the other hand, if everything pans out OK.” <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Somerville is instructed to give you the sum we agreed on in return for the papers I spoke to you about. In what manner you get them is no business of his.”</p>
			<p>“That goes without saying. There is only one thing I wish to make quite plain; <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Somerville understands of course that I have not accepted the mission with which you have entrusted me on account of the money?”</p>
			<p>“Quite,” replied R. gravely, looking him straight in the eyes.</p>
			<p>“I am with the Allies body and soul, I cannot forgive the Germans for outraging the neutrality of Belgium, and if I accept the money that you have offered me it is because I am first and foremost a patriot. I can trust <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Somerville implicitly, I suppose?”</p>
			<p>R. nodded. The Mexican turned to Ashenden.</p>
			<p>“An expedition is being arranged to free my unhappy country from the tyrants that exploit and ruin it and every penny that I receive will go on guns and cartridges. For myself I have no need of money; I am a soldier and I can live on a crust and a few olives. There are only three occupations that befit a gentleman, war, cards and women; it costs nothing to sling a rifle over your shoulder and take to the mountains⁠—and that is real warfare, not this manoeuvring of battalions and firing of great guns⁠—women love me for myself, and I generally win at cards.”</p>
			<p>Ashenden found the flamboyance of this strange creature, with his scented handkerchief and his gold bracelet, very much to his taste. This was far from being just the man in the street (whose tyranny we rail at but in the end submit to) and to the amateur of the baroque in human nature he was a rarity to be considered with delight. He was a purple patch on two legs. Notwithstanding his wig and his hairless big face, he had undoubtedly an air; he was absurd, but he did not give you the impression that he was a man to be trifled with. His self-complacency was magnificent.</p>
			<p>“Where is your kit, Manuel?” asked R.</p>
			<p>It was possible that a frown for an instant darkened the Mexican’s brow at the abrupt question that seemed a little contemptuously to brush to one side his eloquent statement, but he gave no other sign of displeasure. Ashenden suspected that he thought the Colonel a barbarian insensitive to the finer emotions.</p>
			<p>“I left it at the station.”</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Somerville has a diplomatic passport so that he can get it through with his own things at the frontier without examination if you like.”</p>
			<p>“I have very little, a few suits and some linen, but perhaps it would be as well if <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Somerville would take charge of it. I bought half a dozen suits of silk pyjamas before I left Paris.”</p>
			<p>“And what about you?” asked R., turning to Ashenden.</p>
			<p>“I’ve only got one bag. It’s in my room.”</p>
			<p>“You’d better have it taken to the station while there’s someone about. Your train goes at one ten.”</p>
			<p>“Oh?”</p>
			<p>This was the first Ashenden had heard that they were to start that night.</p>
			<p>“I think you’d better get down to Naples as soon as possible.”</p>
			<p>“Very well.”</p>
			<p>R. got up.</p>
			<p>“I’m going to bed. I don’t know what you fellows want to do.”</p>
			<p>“I shall take a walk about Lyons,” said the Hairless Mexican. “I am interested in life. Lend me a hundred francs, Colonel, will you? I have no change on me.”</p>
			<p>R. took out his pocketbook and gave the General the note he asked for. Then to Ashenden:</p>
			<p>“What are you going to do? Wait here?”</p>
			<p>“No,” said Ashenden, “I shall go to the station and read.”</p>
			<p>“You’d both of you better have a whisky and soda before you go, hadn’t you? What about it, Manuel?”</p>
			<p>“It is very kind of you, but I never drink anything but champagne and brandy.”</p>
			<p>“Mixed?” asked R. dryly.</p>
			<p>“Not necessarily,” returned the other with gravity.</p>
			<p>R. ordered brandy and soda and when it came, whereas he and Ashenden helped themselves to both, the Hairless Mexican poured himself out three parts of a tumbler of neat brandy and swallowed it in two noisy gulps. He rose to his feet and put on his coat with the astrakhan collar, seized in one hand his bold black hat and, with the gesture of a romantic actor giving up the girl he loved to one more worthy of her, held out the other to R.</p>
			<p>“Well, Colonel, I will bid you good night and pleasant dreams. I do not expect that we shall meet again so soon.”</p>
			<p>“Don’t make a hash of things, Manuel, and if you do keep your mouth shut.”</p>
			<p>“They tell me that in one of your colleges where the sons of gentlemen are trained to become naval officers it is written in letters of gold: there is no such word as impossible in the British Navy. I do not know the meaning of the word failure.”</p>
			<p>“It has a good many synonyms,” retorted R.</p>
			<p>“I will meet you at the station, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Somerville,” said the Hairless Mexican, and with a flourish left them.</p>
			<p>R. looked at Ashenden with that little smile of his that always made his face look so dangerously shrewd.</p>
			<p>“Well, what d’you think of him?”</p>
			<p>“You’ve got me beat,” said Ashenden. “Is he a mountebank? He seems as vain as a peacock. And with that frightful appearance can he really be the lady’s man he pretends? What makes you think you can trust him?”</p>
			<p>R. gave a low chuckle and he washed his thin, old hands with imaginary soap.</p>
			<p>“I thought you’d like him. He’s quite a character, isn’t he? I think we can trust him.” R.’s eyes suddenly grew opaque. “I don’t believe it would pay him to double-cross us.” He paused for a moment. “Anyhow, we’ve got to risk it. I’ll give you the tickets and the money and then you can take yourself off; I’m all in and I want to go to bed.”</p>
			<p>Ten minutes later Ashenden set out for the station with his bag on a porter’s shoulder.</p>
			<p>Having nearly two hours to wait he made himself comfortable in the waiting-room. The light was good and he read a novel. When the time drew near for the arrival of the train from Paris that was to take them direct to Rome and the Hairless Mexican did not appear Ashenden, beginning to grow a trifle anxious, went out on the platform to look for him. Ashenden suffered from that distressing malady known as train fever; an hour before his train was due he began to have apprehensions lest he should miss it; he was impatient with the porters who would never bring his luggage down from his room in time and he could not understand why the hotel bus cut it so fine; a block in the street would drive him to frenzy and the languid movements of the station porters infuriate him. The whole world seemed in a horrid plot to delay him; people got in his way as he passed through the barriers; others, a long string of them, were at the ticket-office getting tickets for other trains than his and they counted their change with exasperating care; his luggage took an interminable time to register; and then if he was travelling with friends they would go to buy newspapers, or would take a walk along the platform, and he was certain they would be left behind, they would stop to talk to a casual stranger or suddenly be seized with a desire to telephone and disappear at a run. In fact the universe conspired to make him miss every train he wanted to take and he was not happy unless he was settled in his corner, his things on the rack above him, with a good half-hour to spare. Sometimes by arriving at the station too soon he had caught an earlier train than the one he had meant to, but that was nerve-racking and caused him all the anguish of very nearly missing it.</p>
			<p>The Rome express was signalled and there was no sign of the Hairless Mexican, it came in and he was not to be seen. Ashenden became more and more harassed. He walked quickly up and down the platform, looked in all the waiting-rooms, went to the <i>consigne</i> where the luggage was left; he could not find him. There were no sleeping-cars, but a number of people got out and he took two seats in a first-class carriage. He stood at the door, looking up and down the platform and up at the clock; it was useless to go if his travelling companion did not turn up, and Ashenden made up his mind to take his things out of the carriage as the porter cried en voiture: but, by George! he would give the brute hell when he found him. There were three minutes more, then two minutes, then one; at that late hour there were few persons about and all who were travelling had taken their seats. Then he saw the Hairless Mexican, followed by two porters with his luggage and accompanied by a man in a bowler-hat, walk leisurely on to the platform. He caught sight of Ashenden and waved to him.</p>
			<p>“Ah, my dear fellow, there you are. I wondered what had become of you.”</p>
			<p>“Good God, man, hurry up or we shall miss the train.”</p>
			<p>“I never miss a train. Have you got good seats? The <i>chef de gare</i> has gone for the night; this is his assistant.”</p>
			<p>The man in the bowler-hat took it off when Ashenden nodded to him.</p>
			<p>“But this is an ordinary carriage. I am afraid I could not travel in that.” He turned to the stationmaster’s assistant with an affable smile. “You must do better for me than that, <i>mon cher</i>.”</p>
			<p>“<i>Certainement, mon général</i>, I will put you into a <i>salon-lit</i>. Of course.”</p>
			<p>The assistant stationmaster led them along the train and put them in an empty compartment where there were two beds. The Mexican eyed it with satisfaction and watched the porters arrange the luggage.</p>
			<p>“That will do very well. I am much obliged to you.” He held out his hand to the man in the bowler-hat. “I shall not forget you and next time I see the Minister I will tell him with what civility you have treated me.”</p>
			<p>“You are too good, General. I shall be very grateful.”</p>
			<p>A whistle was blown and the train started.</p>
			<p>“This is better than an ordinary first-class carriage, I think, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Somerville,” said the Mexican. “A good traveller should learn how to make the best of things.”</p>
			<p>But Ashenden was still extremely cross.</p>
			<p>“I don’t know why the devil you wanted to cut it so fine. We should have looked a pair of damned fools if we’d missed the train.”</p>
			<p>“My dear fellow, there was never the smallest chance of that. When I arrived I told the stationmaster that I was General Carmona, Commander-in-Chief of the Mexican Army, and that I had to stop off in Lyons for a few hours to hold a conference with the British Field-Marshal. I asked him to hold the train for me if I was delayed and suggested that my government might see its way to conferring an order on him. I have been to Lyons before, I like the girls here; they have not the <i>chic</i> of the Parisians, but they have something, there is no denying that they have something. Will you have a mouthful of brandy before you go to sleep?”</p>
			<p>“No, thank you,” said Ashenden morosely.</p>
			<p>“I always drink a glass before going to bed, it settles the nerves.”</p>
			<p>He looked in his suitcase and without difficulty found a bottle. He put it to his lips and had a long drink, wiped his mouth with the back of his hand and lit a cigarette. Then he took off his boots and lay down. Ashenden dimmed the light.</p>
			<p>“I have never yet made up my mind,” said the Hairless Mexican reflectively, “whether it is pleasanter to go to sleep with the kisses of a beautiful woman on your mouth or with a cigarette between your lips. Have you ever been to Mexico? I will tell you about Mexico tomorrow. Good night.”</p>
			<p>Presently Ashenden heard from his steady breathing that he was asleep and in a little while himself dozed off. Presently he woke. The Mexican, deep in slumber, lay motionless; he had taken off his fur coat and was using it as a blanket; he still wore his wig. Suddenly there was a jolt and the train with a noisy grinding of brakes stopped; in the twinkling of an eye, before Ashenden could realise that anything had happened, the Mexican was on his feet with his hand to his hip.</p>
			<p>“What is it?” he cried.</p>
			<p>“Nothing. Probably only a signal against us.”</p>
			<p>The Mexican sat down heavily on his bed. Ashenden turned on the light.</p>
			<p>“You wake quickly for such a sound sleeper,” he said.</p>
			<p>“You have to in my profession.”</p>
			<p>Ashenden would have liked to ask him whether this was murder, conspiracy or commanding armies, but was not sure that it would be discreet. The General opened his bag and took our the bottle.</p>
			<p>“Will you have a nip?” he asked. “There is nothing like it when you wake suddenly in the night.”</p>
			<p>When Ashenden refused he put the bottle once more to his lips and poured a considerable quantity of liquor down his throat. He sighed and lit a cigarette. Although Ashenden had seen him now drink nearly a bottle of brandy, and it was probable that he had had a good deal more when he was going about the town, he was certainly quite sober. Neither in his manner nor in his speech was there any indication that he had drunk during the evening anything but lemonade.</p>
			<p>The train started and soon Ashenden again fell asleep. When he awoke it was morning and turning round lazily he saw that the Mexican was awake too. He was smoking a cigarette. The floor by his side was strewn with burnt-out butts and the air was thick and grey. He had begged Ashenden not to insist on opening a window, for he said the night air was dangerous.</p>
			<p>“I did not get up, because I was afraid of waking you. Will you do your toilet first or shall I?”</p>
			<p>“I’m in no hurry,” said Ashenden.</p>
			<p>“I am an old campaigner, it will not take me long. Do you wash your teeth every day?”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said Ashenden.</p>
			<p>“So do I. It is a habit I learned in New York. I always think that a fine set of teeth are an adornment to a man.”</p>
			<p>There was a washbasin in the compartment and the General scrubbed his teeth, with gurglings and garglings, energetically. Then he got a bottle of eau de cologne from his bag, poured some of it on a towel and rubbed it over his face and hands. He took a comb and carefully arranged his wig; either it had not moved in the night or else he had set it straight before Ashenden awoke. He got another bottle out of his bag, with a spray attached to it, and squeezing a bulb covered his shirt and coat with a fine cloud of scent, did the same to his handkerchief, and then with a beaming face, like a man who has done his duty by the world and is well pleased, turned to Ashenden and said:</p>
			<p>“Now I am ready to brave the day. I will leave my things for you, you need not be afraid of the eau de cologne, it is the best you can get in Paris.”</p>
			<p>“Thank you very much,” said Ashenden. “All I want is soap and water.”</p>
			<p>“Water? I never use water except when I have a bath. Nothing can be worse for the skin.”</p>
			<p>When they approached the frontier, Ashenden, remembering the General’s instructive gesture when he was suddenly awakened in the night, said to him:</p>
			<p>“If you’ve got a revolver on you I think you’d better give it to me. With my diplomatic passport they’re not likely to search me, but they might take it into their heads to go through you and we don’t want to have any bothers.”</p>
			<p>“It is hardly a weapon, it is only a toy,” returned the Mexican, taking out of his hip-pocket a fully loaded revolver of formidable dimensions. “I do not like parting with it even for an hour, it gives me the feeling that I am not fully dressed. But you are quite right, we do not want to take any risks; I will give you my knife as well. I would always rather use a knife than a revolver; I think it is a more elegant weapon.”</p>
			<p>“I daresay it is only a matter of habit,” answered Ashenden. “Perhaps you are more at home with a knife.”</p>
			<p>“Anyone can pull a trigger, but it needs a man to use a knife.”</p>
			<p>To Ashenden it looked as though it were in a single movement that he tore open his waistcoat and from his belt snatched and opened a long knife of murderous aspect. He handed it to Ashenden with a pleased smile on his large, ugly and naked face.</p>
			<p>“There’s a pretty piece of work for you, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Somerville. I’ve never seen a better bit of steel in my life, it takes an edge like a razor and it’s strong; you can cut a cigarette-paper with it and you can hew down an oak. There is nothing to get out of order and when it is closed it might be the knife a schoolboy uses to cut notches in his desk.”</p>
			<p>He shut it with a click and Ashenden put it along with the revolver in his pocket.</p>
			<p>“Have you anything else?”</p>
			<p>“My hands,” replied the Mexican with arrogance, “but those I daresay the custom officials will not make trouble about.”</p>
			<p>Ashenden remembered the iron grip he had given him when they shook hands and slightly shuddered. They were large and long and smooth; there was not a hair on them or on the wrists, and with the pointed, rosy, manicured nails there was really something sinister about them.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>Ashenden and General Carmona went through the formalities at the frontier independently and when they returned to their carriage Ashenden handed back to his companion the revolver and the knife. He sighed.</p>
			<p>“Now I feel more comfortable. What do you say to a game of cards?”</p>
			<p>“I should like it,” said Ashenden.</p>
			<p>The Hairless Mexican opened his bag again and from a corner extracted a greasy pack of French cards. He asked Ashenden whether he played <i>écarté</i> and when Ashenden told him that he did not suggested piquet. This was a game that Ashenden was not unfamiliar with, so they settled the stakes and began. Since both were in favour of quick action, they played the game of four hands, doubling the first and last. Ashenden had good enough cards, but the General seemed notwithstanding always to have better. Ashenden kept his eyes open and he was not careless of the possibility that his antagonist might correct the inequalities of chance, but he saw nothing to suggest that everything was not above board. He lost game after game. He was capoted and rubiconed. The score against him mounted up and up till he had lost something like a thousand francs, which at that time was a tidy sum. The General smoked innumerable cigarettes. He made them himself with a twist of the finger, a lick of his tongue and incredible celerity. At last he flung himself against the back of his seat.</p>
			<p>“By the way, my friend, does the British Government pay your card losses when you are on a mission?” he asked.</p>
			<p>“It certainly doesn’t.”</p>
			<p>“Well, I think you have lost enough. If it went down on your expense account I would have proposed playing till we reached Rome, but you are sympathetic to me. If it is your own money I do not want to win any more of it.”</p>
			<p>He picked up the cards and put them aside. Ashenden somewhat ruefully took out a number of notes and handed them to the Mexican. He counted them and with his usual neatness put them carefully folded into his pocketbook. Then, leaning forward, he patted Ashenden almost affectionately on the knee.</p>
			<p>“I like you, you are modest and unassuming, you have not the arrogance of your countrymen, and I am sure that you will take my advice in the spirit in which it is meant. Do not play piquet with people you don’t know.”</p>
			<p>Ashenden was somewhat mortified and perhaps his face showed it, for the Mexican seized his hand.</p>
			<p>“My dear fellow, I have not hurt your feelings? I would not do that for the world. You do not play piquet worse than most piquet players. It is not that. If we were going to be together longer I would teach you how to win at cards. One plays cards to win money and there is no sense in losing.”</p>
			<p>“I thought it was only in love and war that all things were fair,” said Ashenden, with a chuckle.</p>
			<p>“Ah, I am glad to see you smile. That is the way to take a loss. I see that you have good humour and good sense. You will go far in life. When I get back to Mexico and am in possession of my estates again you must come and stay with me. I will treat you like a king. You shall ride my best horses, we will go to bullfights together, and if there are girls you fancy you have only to say the word and you shall have them.”</p>
			<p>He began telling Ashenden of the vast territories, the haciendas and the mines in Mexico of which he had been dispossessed. He told him of the feudal state in which he lived. It did not matter whether what he said was true or not, for those sonorous phrases of his were fruity with the rich-distilled perfumes of romance. He described a spacious life that seemed to belong to another age and his eloquent gestures brought before the mind’s eye tawny distances and vast green plantations, great herds of cattle and in the moonlit night the song of the blind singers that melted in the air and the twanging of guitars.</p>
			<p>“Everything I lost, everything. In Paris I was driven to earn a pittance by giving Spanish lessons or showing Americans⁠—<i>Americanos del Norte</i>, I mean⁠—the night life of the city. I who have flung away a thousand <i>duros</i> on a dinner have been forced to beg my bread like a blind Indian. I who have taken pleasure in clasping a diamond bracelet round the wrist of a beautiful woman have been forced to accept a suit of clothes from a hag old enough to be my mother. Patience. Man is born to trouble as the sparks fly upward, but misfortune cannot last forever. The time is ripe and soon we shall strike our blow.”</p>
			<p>He took up the greasy pack of cards and set them out in a number of little piles.</p>
			<p>“Let us see what the cards say. They never lie. Ah, if I had only had greater faith in them I should have avoided the only action of my life that has weighed heavily on me. My conscience is at ease. I did what any man would do under the circumstances, but I regret that necessity forced upon me an action that I would willingly have avoided.”</p>
			<p>He looked through the cards, set some of them on one side on a system Ashenden did not understand, shuffled the remainder and once more put them in little piles.</p>
			<p>“The cards warned me, I will never deny that, their warning was dear and definite. Love and a dark woman, danger, betrayal and death. It was as plain as the nose on your face. Any fool would have known what it meant and I have been using the cards all my life. There is hardly an action that I make without consulting them. There are no excuses. I was besotted. Ah, you of the Northern races do not know what love means, you do not know how it can prevent you from sleeping, how it can take your appetite for food away so that you dwindle as if from a fever, you do not understand what a frenzy it is so that you are like a madman and you will stick at nothing to satisfy your desire. A man like me is capable of every folly and every crime when he is in love, <i>si</i>, <i>Señor</i>, and of heroism. He can scale mountains higher than Everest and swim seas broader than the Atlantic. He is god, he is devil. Women have been my ruin.”</p>
			<p>Once more the Hairless Mexican glanced at the cards, took some out of the little piles and left others in. He shuffled them again.</p>
			<p>“I have been loved by multitudes of women. I do not say it in vanity. I offer no explanation. It is mere matter of fact. Go to Mexico City and ask them what they know of Manuel Carmona and of his triumphs. Ask them how many women have resisted Manuel Carmona.”</p>
			<p>Ashenden, frowning a little, watched him reflectively. He wondered whether R., that shrewd fellow who chose his instruments with such a sure instinct, had not this time made a mistake, and he was uneasy. Did the Hairless Mexican really believe that he was irresistible or was he merely a blatant liar? In the course of his manipulations he had thrown out all the cards in the pack but four, and these now lay in front of him face downwards and side by side. He touched them one by one but did not turn them up.</p>
			<p>“There is fate,” he said, “and no power on earth can change it. I hesitate. This is a moment that ever fills me with apprehension and I have to steel myself to turn over the cards that may tell me that disaster awaits me. I am a brave man, but sometimes I have reached this stage and not had the courage to look at the four vital cards.”</p>
			<p>Indeed now he eyed the backs of them with an anxiety he did not try to hide.</p>
			<p>“What was I saying to you?”</p>
			<p>“You were telling me that women found your fascinations irresistible?” replied Ashenden dryly.</p>
			<p>“Once all the same I found a woman who resisted me. I saw her first in a house, a <i>casa de mujeres</i> in Mexico City, she was going down the stairs as I went up; she was not very beautiful, I had had a hundred more beautiful, but she had something that took my fancy and I told the old woman who kept the house to send her to me. You will know her when you go to Mexico City; they call her La Marqueza. She said that the girl was not an inmate, but came there only from time to time and had left. I told her to have her there next evening and not to let her go till I came. But I was delayed and when I arrived La Marqueza told me that the girl had said she was not used to being kept waiting and had gone. I am a good-natured fellow and I do not mind if women are capricious and teasing, that is part of their charm, so with a laugh I sent her a note of a hundred <i>duros</i> and promised that on the following day I would be punctual. But when I went, on the minute, La Marqueza handed me back my hundred <i>duros</i> and told me the girl did not fancy me. I laughed at her impertinence. I took off the diamond ring I was wearing and told the old woman to give her that and see whether it would induce her to change her mind. In the morning La Marqueza brought me in return for my ring⁠—a red carnation. I did not know whether to be amused or angry. I am not used to being thwarted in my passions, I never hesitate to spend money (what is it for but to squander on pretty women?), and I told La Marqueza to go to the girl and say that I would give her a thousand <i>duros</i> to dine with me that night. Presently she came back with the answer that the girl would come on the condition that I allowed her to go home immediately after dinner. I accepted with a shrug of the shoulders. I did not think she was serious. I thought that she was saying that only to make herself more desired. She came to dinner at my house. Did I say she was not beautiful? She was the most beautiful, the most exquisite creature I had ever met. I was intoxicated. She had charm and she had wit. She had all the <i>gracia</i> of the Andalusian. In one word she was adorable. I asked her why she had treated me so casually and she laughed in my face. I laid myself out to be agreeable. I exercised all my skill. I surpassed myself. But when we finished dinner she rose from her seat and bade me good night. I asked her where she was going. She said I had promised to let her go and she trusted me as a man of honour to keep my word. I expostulated, I reasoned, I raved, I stormed. She held me to my word. All I could induce her to do was to consent to dine with me the following night on the same terms.</p>
			<p>“You will think I was a fool, I was the happiest man alive; for seven days I paid her a thousand silver <i>duros</i> to dine with me. Every evening I waited for her with my heart in my mouth, as nervous as a <i>novillero</i> at his first bullfight, and every evening she played with me, laughed at me, coquetted with me and drove me frantic. I was madly in love with her. I have never loved anyone so much before or since. I could think of nothing else, I was distracted. I neglected everything. I am a patriot and I love my country. A small band of us had got together and made up our minds that we could no longer put up with the misrule from which we were suffering. All the lucrative posts were given to other people, we were being made to pay taxes as though we were tradesmen, and we were exposed to abominable affronts. We had money and men. Our plans were made and we were ready to strike. I had an infinity of things to do, meetings to go to, ammunition to get, orders to give; I was so besotted over this woman that I could attend to nothing.</p>
			<p>“You would have thought that I should be angry with her for making such a fool of me, me who had never known what it was not to gratify my smallest whim; I did not believe that she refused me to inflame my desires, I believed that she told the plain truth when she said that she would not give herself to me until she loved me. She said it was for me to make her love me. I thought her an angel. I was ready to wait. My passion was so consuming that sooner or later, I felt, at last it must communicate itself to her; it was like a fire on the prairie that devours everything around it; and at last⁠—at last she said she loved me. My emotion was so terrific that I thought I should fall down and die. Oh, what rapture! oh, what madness! I would have given her everything I possessed in the world, I would have torn down the stars from heaven to deck her hair; I wanted to do something to prove to her the extravagance of my love, I wanted to do the impossible, the incredible, I wanted to give her myself, my soul, my honour, all, all I had and all I was; and that night when she lay in my arms I told her of our plot and who we were that were concerned in it. I felt her body stiffen with attention, I was conscious of a flicker of her eyelids, there was something, I hardly knew what, the hand that stroked my face was dry and cold; a sudden suspicion seized me and all at once I remembered what the cards had told me: love and a dark woman, danger, betrayal and death. Three times they’d said it and I wouldn’t heed. I made no sign that I had noticed anything. She nestled up against my heart and told me that she was frightened to hear such things and asked me if So-and-so was concerned. I answered her. I wanted to make sure. One after the other, with infinite cunning, between her kisses she cajoled me into giving every detail of the plot, and now I was certain, as certain as I am that you sit before me, that she was a spy. She was a spy of the President’s and she had been set to allure me with her devilish charm and now she had wormed out of me all our secrets. The lives of all of us were in her hands and I knew that if she left that room in twenty-four hours we should be dead men. And I loved her, I loved her; oh, words cannot tell you the agony of desire that burned my heart; love like that is no pleasure; it is pain, pain, but the exquisite pain that transcends all pleasure. It is that heavenly anguish that the saints speak of when they are seized with a divine ecstasy. I knew that she must not leave the room alive and I feared that if I delayed my courage would fail me.</p>
			<p>“ ‘I think I shall sleep,’ she said.</p>
			<p>“ ‘Sleep, my dove,’ I answered.</p>
			<p>“ ’<i>Alma de mi corazón</i>,’ she called me. ‘Soul of my heart.’ They were the last words she spoke. Those heavy lids of hers, dark like a grape and faintly humid, those heavy lids of hers closed over her eyes and a little while I knew by the regular movement of her breast against mine that she slept. You see, I loved her, I could not bear that she should suffer; she was a spy, yes, but my heart bade me spare her the terror of knowing what must happen. It is strange, I felt no anger because she had betrayed me, I should have hated her because of her vileness; I could not, I only felt that my soul was enveloped in night. Poor thing, poor thing. I could have cried for pity for her. I drew my arm very gently from around her, my left arm that was, my right was free, and raised myself on my hand. But she was so beautiful, I turned my face away when I drew the knife with all my strength across her lovely throat. Without awaking she passed from sleep to death.”</p>
			<p>He stopped and stared frowning at the four cards that still lay, their backs upward, waiting to be turned up.</p>
			<p>“It was in the cards. Why did I not take their warning? I will not look at them. Damn them. Take them away.”</p>
			<p>With a violent gesture he swept the whole pack on to the floor.</p>
			<p>“Though I am a freethinker I had masses said for her soul.” He leaned back and rolled himself a cigarette. He inhaled a long breathful of smoke. He shrugged his shoulders. “The Colonel said you were a writer. What do you write?”</p>
			<p>“Stories,” replied Ashenden.</p>
			<p>“Detective stories?”</p>
			<p>“No.”</p>
			<p>“Why not? They are the only ones I read. If I were a writer I should write detective stories.”</p>
			<p>“They are very difficult. You need an incredible amount of invention. I devised a murder story once, but the murder was so ingenious that I could never find a way of bringing it home to the murderer, and after all, one of the conventions of the detective story is that the mystery should in the end be solved and the criminal brought to justice.”</p>
			<p>“If your murder is as ingenious as you think the only means you have of proving the murderer’s guilt is by the discovery of his motives. When once you have found a motive the chances are that you will hit upon evidence that till then had escaped you. If there is no motive the most damning evidence will be inconclusive. Imagine for instance that you went up to a man in a lonely street on a moonless night and stabbed him to the heart. Who would ever think of you? But if he was your wife’s lover, or your brother, or had cheated or insulted you, then a scrap of paper, a bit of string or a chance remark would be enough to hang you. What were your movements at the time he was killed? Are there not a dozen people who saw you before and after? But if he was a total stranger you would never for a moment be suspected. It was inevitable that Jack the Ripper should escape unless he was caught in the act.”</p>
			<p>Ashenden had more than one reason to change the conversation. They were parting at Rome and he thought it necessary to come to an understanding with his companion about their respective movements. The Mexican was going to Brindisi and Ashenden to Naples. He meant to lodge at the Hôtel de Belfast, which was a large second-rate hotel near the harbour frequented by commercial travellers and the thriftier kind of tripper. It would be as well to let the General have the number of his room so that he could come up if necessary without enquiring of the porter, and at the next stopping-place Ashenden got an envelope from the station-buffet and made him address it in his own writing to himself at the post-office in Brindisi. All Ashenden had to do then was to scribble a number on a sheet of paper and post it.</p>
			<p>The Hairless Mexican shrugged his shoulders.</p>
			<p>“To my mind all these precautions are rather childish. There is absolutely no risk. But whatever happens you may be quite sure that I will not compromise you.”</p>
			<p>“This is not the sort of job which I’m very familiar with,” said Ashenden. “I’m content to follow the Colonel’s instructions and know no more about it than it’s essential I should.”</p>
			<p>“Quite so. Should the exigencies of the situation force me to take a drastic step and I get into trouble I shall of course be treated as a political prisoner. Sooner or later Italy is bound to come into the war on the side of the Allies and I shall be released. I have considered everything. But I beg you very seriously to have no more anxiety about the outcome of our mission than if you were going for a picnic on the Thames.”</p>
			<p>But when at last they separated and Ashenden found himself alone in a carriage on the way to Naples he heaved a great sigh of relief. He was glad to be rid of that chattering, hideous and fantastic creature. He was gone to meet Constantine Andreadi at Brindisi and if half of what he had told Ashenden was true, Ashenden could not but congratulate himself that he did not stand in the Greek spy’s shoes. He wondered what sort of a man he was. There was a grimness in the notion of his coming across the blue Ionian, with his confidential papers and his dangerous secrets, all unconscious of the noose into which he was putting his head. Well, that was war, and only fools thought it could be waged with kid gloves on.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>Ashenden arrived in Naples and having taken a room at the hotel, wrote its number on a sheet of paper in block letters and posted it to the Hairless Mexican. He went to the British Consulate where R. had arranged to send any instructions he might have for him and found that they knew about him and everything was in order. Then he put aside these matters and made up his mind to amuse himself. Here in the South the spring was well advanced and in the busy streets the sun was hot. Ashenden knew Naples pretty well. The Piazza di San Ferdinando, with its bustle, the Piazza del Plebiscito, with its handsome church, stirred in his heart pleasant recollections. The Strada di Chiaia was as noisy as ever. He stood at corners and looked up the narrow alleys that climbed the hill precipitously, those alleys of high houses with the washing set out to dry on lines across the street like pennants flying to mark a feast-day; and he sauntered along the shore, looking at the burnished sea with Capri faintly outlined against the day, till he came to Posilippo, where there was an old, rambling and bedraggled <i>palazzo</i> in which in his youth he had spent many a romantic hour. He observed the curious little pain with which the memories of the past wrung his heartstrings. Then he took a fly drawn by a small and scraggy pony and rattled back over the stones to the <i>Galleria</i>, where he sat in the cool and drank an <i>americano</i> and looked at the people who loitered there, talking, forever talking with vivacious gestures, and, exercising his fancy, sought from their appearance to divine their reality.</p>
			<p>For three days Ashenden led the idle life that fitted so well the fantastical, untidy and genial city. He did nothing from morning till night but wander at random, looking, not with the eye of the tourist who seeks for what ought to be seen, nor with the eye of the writer who looks for his own (seeing in a sunset a melodious phrase or in a face the inkling of a character), but with that of the tramp to whom whatever happens is absolute. He went to the museum to look at the statue of Agrippina the Younger, which he had particular reasons for remembering with affection, and took the opportunity to see once more the Titian and the Brueghel in the picture gallery. But he always came back to the church of Santa Chiara. Its grace, its gaiety, the airy persiflage with which it seemed to treat religion and at the back of this its sensual emotion; its extravagance, its elegance of line; to Ashenden it seemed to express, as it were in one absurd and grandiloquent metaphor, the sunny, dusty, lovely city and its bustling inhabitants. It said that life was charming and sad; it’s a pity one hadn’t any money, but money wasn’t everything, and anyway why bother when we are here today and gone tomorrow, and it was all very exciting and amusing, and after all we must make the best of things: <i>facciamo una piccola combinazione</i>.</p>
			<p>But on the fourth morning when Ashenden, having just stepped out of his bath, was trying to dry himself on a towel that absorbed no moisture, his door was quickly opened and a man slipped into his room.</p>
			<p>“What d’you want?” cried Ashenden.</p>
			<p>“It’s all right. Don’t you know me?”</p>
			<p>“Good Lord, it’s the Mexican. What have you done to yourself?”</p>
			<p>He had changed his wig and wore now a black one, close-cropped, that fitted on his head like a cap. It entirely altered the look of him and though this was still odd enough, it was quite different from that which he had borne before. He wore a shabby grey suit.</p>
			<p>“I can only stop a minute. He’s getting shaved.”</p>
			<p>Ashenden felt his cheeks suddenly redden.</p>
			<p>“You found him then?”</p>
			<p>“That wasn’t difficult. He was the only Greek passenger on the ship. I went on board when she got in and asked for a friend who had sailed from the Piræus. I said I had come to meet a <abbr>Mr.</abbr> George Diogenidis. I pretended to be much puzzled at his not coming, and I got into conversation with Andreadi. He’s travelling under a false name. He calls himself Lombardos. I followed him when he landed and do you know the first thing he did? He went into a barber’s and had his beard shaved. What do you think of that?”</p>
			<p>“Nothing. Anyone might have his beard shaved.”</p>
			<p>“That is not what I think. He wanted to change his appearance. Oh, he’s cunning. I admire the Germans, they leave nothing to chance, he’s got his whole story pat, but I’ll tell you that in a minute.”</p>
			<p>“By the way, you’ve changed your appearance too.”</p>
			<p>“Ah, yes, this is a wig I’m wearing; it makes a difference, doesn’t it?”</p>
			<p>“I should never have known you.”</p>
			<p>“One has to take precautions. We are bosom friends. We had to spend the day in Brindisi and he cannot speak Italian. He was glad to have me help him and we travelled up together. I have brought him to this hotel. He says he is going to Rome tomorrow, but I shall not let him out of my sight; I do not want him to give me the slip. He says that he wants to see Naples and I have offered to show him everything there is to see.”</p>
			<p>“Why isn’t he going to Rome today?”</p>
			<p>“That is part of the story. He pretends he is a Greek business man who has made money during the war. He says he was the owner of two coasting steamers and has just sold them. Now he means to go to Paris and have his fling. He says he has wanted to go to Paris all his life and at last has the chance. He is close. I tried to get him to talk. I told him I was a Spaniard and had been to Brindisi to arrange communications with Turkey about war material. He listened to me and I saw he was interested, but he told me nothing and of course I did not think it wise to press him. He has the papers on his person.”</p>
			<p>“How do you know?”</p>
			<p>“He is not anxious about his grip, but he feels every now and then round his middle, they’re either in a belt or in the lining of his vest.”</p>
			<p>“Why the devil did you bring him to this hotel?”</p>
			<p>“I thought it would be more convenient. We may want to search his luggage.”</p>
			<p>“Are you staying here too?”</p>
			<p>“No, I am not such a fool as that. I told him I was going to Rome by the night train and would not take a room. But I must go, I promised to meet him outside the barber’s in fifteen minutes.”</p>
			<p>“All right.”</p>
			<p>“Where shall I find you tonight if I want you?”</p>
			<p>Ashenden for an instant eyed the Hairless Mexican, then with a slight frown looked away.</p>
			<p>“I shall spend the evening in my room.”</p>
			<p>“Very well. Will you just see that there’s nobody in the passage?”</p>
			<p>Ashenden opened the door and looked out. He saw no one. The hotel in point of fact at that season was nearly empty. There were few foreigners in Naples and trade was bad.</p>
			<p>“It’s all right,” said Ashenden.</p>
			<p>The Hairless Mexican walked boldly out. Ashenden closed the door behind him. He shaved and slowly dressed. The sun was shining as brightly as usual on the square and the people who passed, the shabby little carriages with their scrawny horses, had the same air as before, but they did not any longer fill Ashenden with gaiety. He was not comfortable. He went out and called as was his habit at the Consulate to ask if there was a telegram for him. Nothing. Then he went to Cook’s and looked out the trains to Rome: there was one soon after midnight and another at five in the morning. He wished he could catch the first. He did not know what were the Mexican’s plans; if he really wanted to get to Cuba he would do well to make his way to Spain, and, glancing at the notices in the office, Ashenden saw that next day there was a ship sailing from Naples to Barcelona.</p>
			<p>Ashenden was bored with Naples. The glare in the streets tired his eyes, the dust was intolerable, the noise was deafening. He went to the <i>Galleria</i> and had a drink. In the afternoon he went to a cinema. Then, going back to his hotel, he told the clerk that since he was starting so early in the morning he preferred to pay his bill at once, and he took his luggage to the station, leaving in his room only a dispatch-case in which were the printed part of his code and a book or two. He dined. Then returning to the hotel, he sat down to wait for the Hairless Mexican. He could not conceal from himself the fact that he was exceedingly nervous. He began to read, but the book was tiresome, and he tried another; his attention wandered and he glanced at his watch. It was desperately early; he took up his book again, making up his mind that he would not look at his watch till he had read thirty pages, but though he ran his eyes conscientiously down one page after another he could not tell more than vaguely what it was he read. He looked at the time again. Good God, it was only half-past ten. He wondered where the Hairless Mexican was, and what he was doing; he was afraid he would make a mess of things. It was a horrible business. Then it struck him that he had better shut the window and draw the curtains. He smoked innumerable cigarettes. He looked at his watch and it was a quarter past eleven. A thought struck him and his heart began to beat against his chest; out of curiosity he counted his pulse and was surprised to find that it was normal. Though it was a warm night and the room was stuffy his hands and feet were icy. What a nuisance it was, he reflected irritably, to have an imagination that conjured up pictures of things that you didn’t in the least want to see! From his standpoint as a writer he had often considered murder and his mind went to that fearful description of one in <i>Crime and Punishment</i>. He did not want to think of this topic, but it forced itself upon him; his book dropped to his knees and staring at the wall in front of him (it had a brown wallpaper with a pattern of dingy roses) he asked himself how, if one had to, one would commit a murder in Naples. Of course there was the Villa, the great leafy garden facing the bay in which stood the aquarium; that was deserted at night and very dark; things happened there that did not bear the light of day and prudent persons after dusk avoided its sinister paths. Beyond Posilippo the road was very solitary and there were byways that led up the hill in which by night you would never meet a soul, but how would you induce a man who had any nerves to go there? You might suggest a row in the bay, but the boatman who hired the boat would see you; it was doubtful indeed if he would let you go on the water alone; there were disreputable hotels down by the harbour where no questions were asked of persons who arrived late at night without luggage; but here again the waiter who showed you your room had the chance of a good look at you and you had on entering to sign an elaborate questionnaire.</p>
			<p>Ashenden looked once more at the time. He was very tired. He sat now not even trying to read, his mind a blank.</p>
			<p>Then the door opened softly and he sprang to his feet. His flesh crept. The Hairless Mexican stood before him.</p>
			<p>“Did I startle you?” he asked smiling. “I thought you would prefer me not to knock.”</p>
			<p>“Did anyone see you come in?”</p>
			<p>“I was let in by the night-watchman; he was asleep when I rang and didn’t even look at me. I’m sorry I’m so late, but I had to change.”</p>
			<p>The Hairless Mexican wore now the clothes he had travelled down in and his fair wig. It was extraordinary how different he looked. He was bigger and more flamboyant; the very shape of his face was altered. His eyes were shining and he seemed in excellent spirits. He gave Ashenden a glance.</p>
			<p>“How white you are, my friend! Surely you’re not nervous?”</p>
			<p>“Have you got the documents?”</p>
			<p>“No. He hadn’t got them on him. This is all he had.”</p>
			<p>He put down on the table a bulky pocketbook and a passport.</p>
			<p>“I don’t want them,” said Ashenden quickly. “Take them.”</p>
			<p>With a shrug of the shoulders the Hairless Mexican put the things back in his pocket.</p>
			<p>“What was in his belt? You said he kept feeling round his middle.”</p>
			<p>“Only money. I’ve looked through the pocketbook. It contains nothing but private letters and photographs of women. He must have locked the documents in his grip before coming out with me this evening.”</p>
			<p>“Damn,” said Ashenden.</p>
			<p>“I’ve got the key of his room. We’d better go and look through his luggage.”</p>
			<p>Ashenden felt a sensation of sickness in the pit of his stomach. He hesitated. The Mexican smiled not unkindly.</p>
			<p>“There’s no risk, <i>amigo</i>,” he said, as though he were reassuring a small boy, “but if you don’t feel happy, I’ll go alone.”</p>
			<p>“No, I’ll come with you,” said Ashenden.</p>
			<p>“There’s no one awake in the hotel and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Andreadi won’t disturb us. Take off your shoes if you like.”</p>
			<p>Ashenden did not answer. He frowned because he noticed that his hands were slightly trembling. He unlaced his shoes and slipped them off. The Mexican did the same.</p>
			<p>“You’d better go first,” he said. “Turn to the left and go straight along the corridor. It’s number thirty-eight.”</p>
			<p>Ashenden opened the door and stepped out. The passage was dimly lit. It exasperated him to feel so nervous when he could not but be aware that his companion was perfectly at ease. When they reached the door the Hairless Mexican inserted the key, turned the lock and went in. He switched on the light. Ashenden followed him and closed the door. He noticed that the shutters were shut.</p>
			<p>“Now we’re all right. We can take our time.”</p>
			<p>He took a bunch of keys out of his pocket, tried one or two and at last hit upon the right one. The suitcase was filled with clothes.</p>
			<p>“Cheap clothes,” said the Mexican contemptuously as he took them out. “My own principle is that it’s always cheaper in the end to buy the best. After all one is a gentleman or one isn’t a gentleman.”</p>
			<p>“Are you obliged to talk?” asked Ashenden.</p>
			<p>“A spice of danger affects people in different ways. It only excites me, but it puts you in a bad temper, <i>amigo</i>.”</p>
			<p>“You see I’m scared and you’re not,” replied Ashenden with candour.</p>
			<p>“It’s merely a matter of nerves.”</p>
			<p>Meanwhile he felt the clothes, rapidly but with care, as he took them out. There were no papers of any sort in the suitcase. Then he took out his knife and slit the lining. It was a cheap piece and the lining was gummed to the material of which the suitcase was made. There was no possibility of anything being concealed in it.</p>
			<p>“They’re not here. They must be hidden in the room.”</p>
			<p>“Are you sure he didn’t deposit them in some office? At one of the consulates, for example?”</p>
			<p>“He was never out of my sight for a moment except when he was getting shaved.”</p>
			<p>The Hairless Mexican opened the drawers and the cupboard. There was no carpet on the floor. He looked under the bed, in it, and under the mattress. His dark eyes shot up and down the room, looking for a hiding-place, and Ashenden felt that nothing escaped him.</p>
			<p>“Perhaps he left them in charge of the clerk downstairs?”</p>
			<p>“I should have known it. And he wouldn’t dare. They’re not here. I can’t understand it.”</p>
			<p>He looked about the room irresolutely. He frowned in the attempt to guess at a solution of the mystery.</p>
			<p>“Let’s get out of here,” said Ashenden.</p>
			<p>“In a minute.”</p>
			<p>The Mexican went down on his knees, quickly and neatly folded the clothes, and packed them up again. He locked the bag and stood up. Then, putting out the light, he slowly opened the door and looked out. He beckoned to Ashenden and slipped into the passage. When Ashenden had followed him he stopped and locked the door, put the key in his pocket and walked with Ashenden to his room. When they were inside it and the bolt drawn Ashenden wiped his clammy hands and his forehead.</p>
			<p>“Thank God, we’re out of that!”</p>
			<p>“There wasn’t really the smallest danger. But what are we to do now? The Colonel will be angry that the papers haven’t been found.”</p>
			<p>“I’m taking the five o’clock train to Rome. I shall wire for instructions there.”</p>
			<p>“Very well, I will come with you.”</p>
			<p>“I should have thought it would suit you better to get out of the country more quickly. There’s a boat tomorrow that goes to Barcelona. Why don’t you take that and if necessary I can come to see you there?”</p>
			<p>The Hairless Mexican gave a little smile.</p>
			<p>“I see that you are anxious to be rid of me. Well, I won’t thwart a wish that your inexperience in these matters excuses. I will go to Barcelona. I have a visa for Spain.”</p>
			<p>Ashenden looked at his watch. It was a little after two. He had nearly three hours to wait. His companion comfortably rolled himself a cigarette.</p>
			<p>“What do you say to a little supper?” he asked. “I’m as hungry as a wolf.”</p>
			<p>The thought of food sickened Ashenden, but he was terribly thirsty. He did not want to go out with the Hairless Mexican, but neither did he want to stay in that hotel by himself.</p>
			<p>“Where could one go at this hour?”</p>
			<p>“Come along with me. I’ll find you a place.”</p>
			<p>Ashenden put on his hat and took his dispatch-case in his hand. They went downstairs. In the hall the porter was sleeping soundly on a mattress on the floor. As they passed the desk, walking softly in order not to wake him, Ashenden noticed in the pigeonhole belonging to his room a letter. He took it out and saw that it was addressed to him. They tiptoed out of the hotel and shut the door behind them. Then they walked quickly away. Stopping after a hundred yards or so under a lamppost Ashenden took the letter out of his pocket and read it; it came from the Consulate and said: <i>The enclosed telegram arrived tonight and in case it is urgent I am sending it round to your hotel by messenger</i>. It had apparently been left some time before midnight while Ashenden was sitting in his room. He opened the telegram and saw that it was in code.</p>
			<p>“Well, it’ll have to wait,” he said, putting it back in his pocket.</p>
			<p>The Hairless Mexican walked as though he knew his way through the deserted streets and Ashenden walked by his side. At last they came to a tavern in a blind alley, noisome and evil, and this the Mexican entered.</p>
			<p>“It’s not the Ritz,” he said, “but at this hour of the night it’s only in a place like this that we stand a chance of getting something to eat.”</p>
			<p>Ashenden found himself in a long sordid room at one end of which a wizened young man sat at a piano; there were tables standing out from the wall on each side and against them benches. A number of persons, men and women, were sitting about. They were drinking beer and wine. The women were old, painted, and hideous; and their harsh gaiety was at once noisy and lifeless. When Ashenden and the Hairless Mexican came in they all stared and when they sat down at one of the tables Ashenden looked away in order not to meet the leering eyes, just ready to break into a smile, that sought his insinuatingly. The wizened pianist strummed a tune and several couples got up and began to dance. Since there were not enough men to go round some of the women danced together. The General ordered two plates of spaghetti and a bottle of Capri wine. When the wine was brought he drank a glassful greedily and then waiting for the <i>pasta</i> eyed the women who were sitting at the other tables.</p>
			<p>“Do you dance?” he asked Ashenden. “I’m going to ask one of these girls to have a turn with me.”</p>
			<p>He got up and Ashenden watched him go up to one who had at least flashing eyes and white teeth to recommend her; she rose and he put his arm round her. He danced well. Ashenden saw him begin talking; the woman laughed and presently the look of indifference with which she had accepted his offer changed to one of interest. Soon they were chatting gaily. The dance came to an end and putting her back at her table he returned to Ashenden and drank another glass of wine.</p>
			<p>“What do you think of my girl?” he asked. “Not bad, is she? It does one good to dance. Why don’t you ask one of them? This is a nice place, is it not? You can always trust me to find anything like this. I have an instinct.”</p>
			<p>The pianist started again. The woman looked at the Hairless Mexican and when with his thumb he pointed to the floor she jumped up with alacrity. He buttoned up his coat, arched his back and standing up by the side of the table waited for her to come to him. He swung her off, talking, smiling, and already he was on familiar terms with everyone in the room. In fluent Italian, with his Spanish accent, he exchanged badinage with one and the other. They laughed at his sallies. Then the waiter brought two heaped platefuls of macaroni and when the Mexican saw them he stopped dancing without ceremony and, allowing his partner to get back to her table as she chose, hurried to his meal.</p>
			<p>“I’m ravenous,” he said. “And yet I ate a good dinner. Where did you dine? You’re going to eat some macaroni, aren’t you?”</p>
			<p>“I have no appetite,” said Ashenden.</p>
			<p>But he began to eat and to his surprise found that he was hungry. The Hairless Mexican ate with huge mouthfuls, enjoying himself vastly; his eyes shone and he was loquacious. The woman he had danced with had in that short time told him all about herself and he repeated now to Ashenden what she had said. He stuffed huge pieces of bread into his mouth. He ordered another bottle of wine.</p>
			<p>“Wine?” he cried scornfully. “Wine is not a drink, only champagne; it does not even quench your thirst. Well, <i>amigo</i>, are you feeling better?”</p>
			<p>“I’m bound to say I am,” smiled Ashenden.</p>
			<p>“Practice, that is all you want, practice.”</p>
			<p>He stretched out his hand to pat Ashenden on the arm.</p>
			<p>“What’s that?” cried Ashenden with a start. “What’s that stain on your cuff?”</p>
			<p>The Hairless Mexican gave his sleeve a glance.</p>
			<p>“That? Nothing. It’s only blood. I had a little accident and cut myself.”</p>
			<p>Ashenden was silent. His eyes sought the clock that hung over the door.</p>
			<p>“Are you anxious about your train? Let me have one more dance and then I’ll accompany you to the station.”</p>
			<p>The Mexican got up and with his sublime self-assurance seized in his arms the woman who sat nearest to him and danced away with her. Ashenden watched him moodily. He was a monstrous, terrible figure with that blond wig and his hairless face, but he moved with a matchless grace; his feet were small and seemed to hold the ground like the pads of a cat or a tiger; his rhythm was wonderful and you could not but see that the bedizened creature he danced with was intoxicated by his gestures. There was music in his toes and in the long arms that held her so firmly, and there was music in those long legs that seemed to move strangely from the hips. Sinister and grotesque though he was, there was in him now a feline elegance, even something of beauty, and you felt a secret, shameful fascination. To Ashenden he suggested one of those sculptures of the pre-Aztec hewers of stone, in which there is barbarism and vitality, something terrible and cruel, and yet withal a brooding and significant loveliness. All the same he would gladly have left him to finish the night by himself in that sordid dance-hall, but he knew that he must have a business conversation with him. He did not look forward to it without misgiving. He had been instructed to give Manuel Carmona certain sums in return for certain documents. Well, the documents were not forthcoming, and as for the rest⁠—Ashenden knew nothing about that; it was no business of his. The Hairless Mexican waved gaily as he passed him.</p>
			<p>“I will come the moment the music stops. Pay the bill and then I shall be ready.”</p>
			<p>Ashenden wished he could have seen into his mind. He could not even make a guess at its workings. Then the Mexican, with his scented handkerchief wiping the sweat from his brow, came back.</p>
			<p>“Have you had a good time, General?” Ashenden asked him.</p>
			<p>“I always have a good time. Poor white trash, but what do I care? I like to feel the body of a woman in my arms and see her eyes grow languid and her lips part as her desire for me melts the marrow in her bones like butter in the sun. Poor white trash, but women.”</p>
			<p>They sallied forth. The Mexican proposed that they should walk and in that quarter, at that hour, there would have been little chance of finding a cab; but the sky was starry. It was a summer night and the air was still. The silence walked beside them like the ghost of a dead man. When they neared the station the houses seemed on a sudden to take on a greyer, more rigid line, and you felt that the dawn was at hand. A little shiver trembled through the night. It was a moment of apprehension and the soul for an instant was anxious; it was as though, inherited down the years in their countless millions, it felt a witless fear that perhaps another day would not break. But they entered the station and the night once more enwrapped them. One or two porters lolled about like stagehands after the curtain has rung down and the scene is struck. Two soldiers in dim uniforms stood motionless.</p>
			<p>The waiting-room was empty, but Ashenden and the Hairless Mexican went to sit in the most retired part of it.</p>
			<p>“I still have an hour before my train goes. I’ll just see what this cable’s about.”</p>
			<p>He took it out of his pocket and from the dispatch-case got his code. He was not then using a very elaborate one. It was in two parts, one contained in a skin book and the other, given him on a sheet of paper and destroyed by him before he left allied territory, committed to memory. Ashenden put on his spectacles and set to work. The Hairless Mexican sat in a corner of the seat, rolling himself cigarettes and smoking; he sit there placidly, taking no notice of what Ashenden did, and enjoyed his well-earned repose. Ashenden deciphered the groups of numbers one by one and as he got it out jotted down each word on a piece of paper. His method was to abstract his mind from the sense till he had finished, since he had discovered that if you took notice of the words as they came along you often jumped to a conclusion and sometimes were led into error. So he translated quite mechanically, without paying attention to the words as he wrote them one after the other. When at last he had done he read the complete message. It ran as follows:</p>
			<p><i>Constantine Andreadi has been detained by illness at Piræus. He will be unable to sail. Return Geneva and await instructions</i>.</p>
			<p>At first Ashenden could not understand. He read it again. He shook from head to foot. Then, for once robbed of his self-possession, he blurted out, in a hoarse, agitated and furious whisper:</p>
			<p>“You bloody fool, you’ve killed the wrong man.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
