<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Mr. Harrington’s Washing</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-7" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title"><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington’s Washing</h2>
			<p>When Ashenden went on deck and saw before him a low-lying coast and a white town he felt a pleasant flutter of excitement. It was early and the sun had not long risen, but the sea was glassy and the sky was blue; it was warm already and one knew that the day would be sweltering. Vladivostok. It really gave one the sensation of being at the end of the world. It was a long journey that Ashenden had made from New York to San Francisco, across the Pacific in a Japanese boat to Yokohama, then from Tsuruki in a Russian boat, he the only Englishman on board, up the Sea of Japan. From Vladivostok he was to take the Trans-Siberian to Petrograd. It was the most important mission that he had ever had and he was pleased with the sense of responsibility that it gave him. He had no one to give him orders, unlimited funds (he carried in a belt next to his skin bills of exchange for a sum so enormous that he was staggered when he thought of them), and though he had been set to do something that was beyond human possibility he did not know this and was prepared to set about his task with confidence. He believed in his own astuteness. Though he had both esteem and admiration for the sensibility of the human race, he had little respect for their intelligence: man has always found it easier to sacrifice his life than to learn the multiplication table.</p>
			<p>Ashenden did not much look forward to ten days on a Russian train, and in Yokohama he had heard rumours that in one or two places bridges had been blown up and the line cut. He was told that the soldiers, completely out of hand, would rob him of everything he possessed and turn him out on the steppe to shift for himself. It was a cheerful prospect. But the train was certainly starting and whatever happened later (and Ashenden had always a feeling that things never turned out as badly as you expected) he was determined to get a place on it. His intention on landing was to go at once to the British Consulate and find out what arrangements had been made for him; but as they neared the shore and he was able to discern the untidy and bedraggled town he felt not a little forlorn. He knew but a few words of Russian. The only man on the ship who spoke English was the purser and though he promised Ashenden to do anything he could to help him, Ashenden had the impression that he must not too greatly count upon him. It was a relief then, when they docked, to have a young man, small and with a mop of untidy hair, obviously a Jew, come up to him and ask if his name was Ashenden.</p>
			<p>“Mine is Benedict. I’m the interpreter at the British Consulate. I’ve been told to look after you. We’ve got you a place on the train tonight.”</p>
			<p>Ashenden’s spirits went up. They landed. The little Jew looked after his luggage and had his passport examined and then, getting into a car that waited for them, they drove off to the Consulate.</p>
			<p>“I’ve had instructions to offer you every facility,” said the Consul, “and you’ve only got to tell me what you want. I’ve fixed you up all right on the train, but God knows if you’ll ever get to Petrograd. Oh, by the way, I’ve got a travelling companion for you. He’s a man called Harrington, an American, and he’s going to Petrograd for a firm in Philadelphia. He’s trying to fix up some deal with the Provisional Government.”</p>
			<p>“What’s he like?” asked Ashenden.</p>
			<p>“Oh, he’s all right. I wanted him to come with the American Consul to luncheon, but they’ve gone for an excursion in the country. You must get to the station a couple of hours before the train starts. There’s always an awful scrimmage and if you’re not there in good time someone will pinch your seat.”</p>
			<p>The train started at midnight and Ashenden dined with Benedict at the station restaurant which was, it appeared, the only place in that slatternly town where you could get a decent meal. It was crowded. The service was intolerably slow. Then they went on to the platform, where, though they had still two hours to spare, there was already a seething mob. Whole families, sitting on piles of luggage, seemed to be camped there. People rushed to and fro, or stood in little groups violently arguing. Women screamed. Others were silently weeping. Here two men were engaged in a fierce quarrel. It was a scene of indescribable confusion. The light in the station was wan and cold and the white faces of all those people were like the white faces of the dead waiting, patient or anxious, distraught or penitent, for the judgment of the last day. The train was made up and most of the carriages were already filled to overflowing. When at last Benedict found that in which Ashenden had his place a man sprang out of it excitedly.</p>
			<p>“Come in and sit down,” he said. “I’ve had the greatest difficulty in keeping your seat. A fellow wanted to come in here with a wife and two children. My Consul has just gone off with him to see the stationmaster.”</p>
			<p>“This is <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington,” said Benedict.</p>
			<p>Ashenden stepped into the carriage. It had two berths in it. The porter stowed his luggage away. He shook hands with his travelling companion.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> John Quincy Harrington was a very thin man of somewhat less than middle height, he had a yellow, bony face, with large, pale-blue eyes and when he took off his hat to wipe his brow wet from the perturbation he had endured he showed a large, bald skull; it was very bony and the ridges and protuberances stood out disconcertingly. He wore a bowler hat, a black coat and waistcoat, and a pair of striped trousers; a very high white collar and a neat, unobtrusive tie. Ashenden did not know precisely how you should dress in order to take a ten days’ journey across Siberia, but he could not but think that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington’s costume was eccentric. He spoke with precision in a high-pitched voice and in an accent that Ashenden recognised as that of New England.</p>
			<p>In a minute the stationmaster came accompanied by a bearded Russian, suffering evidently from profound emotion, and followed by a lady holding two children by the hand. The Russian, tears running down his face, was talking with quivering lips to the stationmaster and his wife between her sobs was apparently telling him the story of her life. When they arrived at the carriage the altercation became more violent and Benedict joined in with his fluent Russian. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington did not know a word of the language, but being obviously of an excitable turn broke in and explained in voluble English that these seats had been booked by the Consuls of Great Britain and the United States respectively, and though he didn’t know about the King of England, he could tell them straight and they could take it from him that the President of the United States would never permit an American citizen to be done out of a seat on the train that he had duly paid for. He would yield to force, but to nothing else, and if they touched him he would register a complaint with the Consul at once. He said all this and a great deal more to the stationmaster, who of course had no notion what he was talking about, but with much emphasis and a good deal of gesticulation made him in reply a passionate speech. This roused <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington to the utmost pitch of indignation, for shaking his fist in the stationmaster’s face, his own pale with fury, he cried out:</p>
			<p>“Tell him I don’t understand a word he says and I don’t want to understand. If the Russians want us to look upon them as a civilised people, why don’t they talk a civilised language? Tell him that I am <abbr>Mr.</abbr> John Quincy Harrington and I’m travelling on behalf of <abbr>Messrs.</abbr> Crewe and Adams of Philadelphia with a special letter of introduction to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Kerensky and if I’m not left in peaceful possession of this carriage <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crewe will take the matter up with the Administration in Washington.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington’s manner was so truculent and his gestures so menacing that the stationmaster, throwing up the sponge, turned on his heel without another word and walked moodily away. He was followed by the bearded Russian and his wife arguing heatedly with him and the two apathetic children. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington jumped back into the carriage.</p>
			<p>“I’m terribly sorry to have to refuse to give up my seat to a lady with two children,” he said. “No one knows better than I the respect due to a woman and a mother, but I’ve got to get to Petrograd by this train if I don’t want to lose a very important order and I’m not going to spend ten days in a corridor for all the mothers in Russia.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t blame you,” said Ashenden.</p>
			<p>“I am a married man and I have two children myself. I know that travelling with your family is a difficult matter, but there’s nothing that I know to prevent you from staying at home.”</p>
			<p>When you are shut up with a man for ten days in a railway carriage you can hardly fail to learn most of what there is to know about him, and for ten days (for eleven to be exact) Ashenden spent twenty-four hours a day with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington. It is true that they went into the dining-room three times a day for their meals, but they sat opposite to one another; it is true that the train stopped for an hour morning and afternoon so that they were able to have a tramp up and down the platform, but they walked side by side. Ashenden made acquaintance with some of his fellow-travellers and sometimes they came into the compartment to have a chat, but if they only spoke French or German <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington would watch them with acidulous disapproval and if they spoke English he would never let them get a word in. For <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington was a talker. He talked as though it were a natural function of the human being, automatically, as men breathe or digest their food; he talked not because he had something to say, but because he could not help himself, in a high-pitched, nasal voice, without inflection, at one dead level of tone. He talked with precision, using a copious vocabulary and forming his sentences with deliberation; he never used a short word when a longer one would do; he never paused. He went on and on. It was not a torrent, for there was nothing impetuous about it, it was like a stream of lava pouring irresistibly down the side of a volcano. It flowed with a quiet and steady force that overwhelmed everything that was in its path.</p>
			<p>Ashenden thought he had never known as much about anyone as he knew about <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington, and not only about him, with all his opinions, habits and circumstances, but about his wife and his wife’s family, his children and their schoolfellows, his employers and the alliances they had made for three or four generations with the best families of Philadelphia. His own family had come from Devonshire early in the eighteenth century and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington had been to the village where the graves of his forebears were still to be seen in the churchyard. He was proud of his English ancestry, but proud too of his American birth, though to him America was a little strip of land along the Atlantic coast and Americans were a small number of persons of English or Dutch origin whose blood had never been sullied by foreign admixture. He looked upon the Germans, Swedes, Irish and the inhabitants of Central and Eastern Europe who for the last hundred years have descended upon the United States as interlopers. He turned his attention away from them as a maiden lady who lived in a secluded manor might avert her eyes from the factory chimneys that had trespassed upon her retirement.</p>
			<p>When Ashenden mentioned a man of vast wealth who owned some of the finest pictures in America <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington said:</p>
			<p>“I’ve never met him. My great-aunt Maria Penn Warmington always said his grandmother was a very good cook. My great-aunt Maria was terribly sorry when she left her to get married. She said she never knew anyone who could make an apple pancake as she could.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington was devoted to his wife and he told Ashenden at unbelievable length how cultivated and what a perfect mother she was. She had delicate health and had undergone a great number of operations all of which he described in detail. He had had two operations himself, one on his tonsils and one to remove his appendix and he took Ashenden day by day through his experiences. All his friends had had operations and his knowledge of surgery was encyclopaedic. He had two sons, both at school, and he was seriously considering whether he would not be well-advised to have them operated on. It was curious that one of them should have enlarged tonsils, and he was not at all happy about the appendix of the other. They were more devoted to one another than he had ever seen two brothers be and a very good friend of his, the brightest surgeon in Philadelphia, had offered to operate on them both together so that they should not be separated. He showed Ashenden photographs of the boys and their mother. This journey of his to Russia was the first time in their lives that he had been separated from them and every morning he wrote a long letter to his wife telling her everything that had happened and a good deal of what he had said during the day. Ashenden watched him cover sheet after sheet of paper with his neat, legible and precise handwriting.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington had read all the books on conversation and knew its technique to the last detail. He had a little book in which he noted down the stories he heard and he told Ashenden that when he was going out to dinner he always looked up half a dozen so that he should not be at a loss. They were marked with a <i epub:type="z3998:grapheme">G</i> if they could be told in general society and with an <i epub:type="z3998:grapheme">M</i> (for men) if they were more fit for rough masculine ears. He was a specialist in that peculiar form of anecdote that consists in narrating a long serious incident, piling detail upon detail, till a comic end is reached. He spared you nothing and Ashenden foreseeing the point long before it arrived would clench his hands and knit his brows in the strenuous effort not to betray his impatience and at last force from his unwilling mouth a grim and hollow laugh. If someone came into the compartment in the middle <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington would greet him with cordiality.</p>
			<p>“Come right in and sit down. I was just telling my friend a story. You must listen to it, it’s one of the funniest things you ever heard.”</p>
			<p>Then he would begin again from the very beginning and repeat it word for word, without altering a single apt epithet, till he reached the humorous end. Ashenden suggested once that they should see whether they could find two people on the train who played cards so that they might while away the time with a game of bridge, but <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington said he never touched cards and when Ashenden in desperation began to play patience he pulled a wry face.</p>
			<p>“It beats me how an intelligent man can waste his time card-playing, and of all the unintellectual pursuits I have ever seen it seems to me that solitaire is the worst. It kills conversation. Man is a social animal and he exercises the highest part of his nature when he takes part in social intercourse.”</p>
			<p>“There is a certain elegance in wasting time,” said Ashenden. “Any fool can waste money, but when you waste time you waste what is priceless. Besides,” he added with bitterness, “you can still talk.”</p>
			<p>“How can I talk when your attention is taken up by whether you are going to get a black seven to put on a red eight? Conversation calls forth the highest powers of the intellect and if you have made a study of it you have the right to expect that the person you’re talking to will give you the fullest attention he is capable of.”</p>
			<p>He did not say this acrimoniously, but with the good-humoured patience of a man who has been much tried. He was just stating a plain fact and Ashenden could take it or leave it. It was the claim of the artist to have his work taken seriously.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington was a diligent reader. He read pencil in hand, underlining passages that attracted his attention and on the margin making in his neat writing comments on what he read. This he was fond of discussing and when Ashenden himself was reading and felt on a sudden that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington, book in one hand and pencil in the other, was looking at him with his large pale eyes he began to have violent palpitations of the heart. He dared not look up, he dared not even turn the page, for he knew that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington would regard this as ample excuse to break into a discourse, but remained with his eyes fixed desperately on a single word, like a chicken with its beak to a chalk line, and only ventured to breathe when he realised that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington, having given up the attempt, had resumed his reading. He was then engaged on a History of the American Constitution in two volumes and for recreation was perusing a stout volume that purported to contain all the great speeches of the world. For <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington was an after-dinner speaker and had read all the best books on speaking in public. He knew exactly how to get on good terms with his audience, just where to put in the serious words that touched their hearts, how to catch their attention by a few apt stories and finally with what degree of eloquence, suiting the occasion, to deliver his peroration.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington was very fond of reading aloud. Ashenden had had frequent occasion to observe the distressing propensity of Americans for this pastime. In hotel drawing-rooms at night after dinner he had often seen the father of a family seated in a retired corner and surrounded by his wife, his two sons and his daughter, reading to them. On ships crossing the Atlantic he had sometimes watched with awe the tall, spare gentleman of commanding aspect who sat in the centre of fifteen ladies no longer in their first youth and in a resonant voice read to them the history of Art. Walking up and down the promenade deck he had passed honeymooning couples lying on deck-chairs and caught the unhurried tones of the bride as she read to her young husband the pages of a popular novel. It had always seemed to him a curious way of showing affection. He had had friends who had offered to read to him and he had known women who had said they loved being read to, but he had always politely refused the invitation and firmly ignored the hint. He liked neither reading aloud nor being read aloud to. In his heart he thought the national predilection for this form of entertainment the only flaw in the perfection of the American character. But the immortal gods love a good laugh at the expense of human beings and now delivered him, bound and helpless, to the knife of the high priest. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington flattered himself that he was a very good reader and he explained to Ashenden the theory and practice of the art. Ashenden learned that there were two schools, the dramatic and the natural: in the first you imitated the voices of those who spoke (if you were reading a novel), and when the heroine wailed you wailed and when emotion choked her you choked too; but in the other you read as impassively as though you were reading the price-list of a mail-order house in Chicago. This was the school <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington belonged to. In the seventeen years of his married life he had read aloud to his wife, and to his sons as soon as they were old enough to appreciate them, the novels of Sir Walter Scott, Jane Austen, Dickens, the Brontë Sisters, Thackeray, George Eliot, Nathaniel Hawthorne and W. D. Howells. Ashenden came to the conclusion that it was second nature with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington to read aloud and to prevent him from doing so made him as uneasy as cutting off his tobacco made the confirmed smoker. He would take you unawares.</p>
			<p>“Listen to this,” he would say, “you must listen to this,” as though he were suddenly struck by the excellence of a maxim or the neatness of a phrase. “Now just tell me if you don’t think this is remarkably well put. It’s only three lines.”</p>
			<p>He read them and Ashenden was willing to give him a moment’s attention, but having finished them, without pausing for a moment to take breath, he went on. He went right on. On and on. In his measured high-pitched voice, without emphasis or expression, he read page after page. Ashenden fidgeted, crossed and uncrossed his legs, lit cigarettes and smoked them, sat first in one position, then in another. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington went on and on. The train went leisurely through the interminable steppes of Siberia. They passed villages and crossed rivers. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington went on and on. When he finished a great speech by Edmund Burke he put down the book in triumph.</p>
			<p>“Now that in my opinion is one of the finest orations in the English language. It is certainly a part of our common heritage that we can look upon with genuine pride.”</p>
			<p>“Doesn’t it seem to you a little ominous that the people to whom Edmund Burke made that speech are all dead?” asked Ashenden gloomily.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington was about to reply that this was hardly to be wondered at since the speech was made in the eighteenth century, when it dawned upon him that Ashenden (bearing up wonderfully under affliction as any unprejudiced person could not fail to admit) was making a joke. He slapped his knee and laughed heartily.</p>
			<p>“Gee, that’s a good one,” he said. “I’ll write that down in my little book. I see exactly how I can bring it in one time when I have to speak at our luncheon club.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington was a highbrow; but that appellation, invented by the vulgar as a term of abuse, he had accepted like the instrument of a saint’s martyrdom, the gridiron of Saint Laurence for instance or the wheel of Saint Catherine, as an honorific title. He gloried in it.</p>
			<p>“Emerson was a highbrow,” he said. “Longfellow was a highbrow. Oliver Wendell Holmes was a highbrow. James Russell Lowell was a highbrow.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington’s study of American literature had taken him no further down the years than the period during which those eminent, but not precisely thrilling authors, flourished.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington was a bore. He exasperated Ashenden, and enraged him; he got on his nerves, and drove him to frenzy. But Ashenden did not dislike him. His self-satisfaction was enormous but so ingenuous that you could not resent it; his conceit was so childlike that you could only smile at it. He was so well-meaning, so thoughtful, so deferential, so polite that though Ashenden would willingly have killed him he could not but own that in that short while he had conceived for <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington something very like affection. His manners were exquisite, formal, a trifle elaborate perhaps (there is no harm in that, for good manners are the product of an artificial state of society and so can bear a touch of the powdered wig and the lace ruffle), but though natural to his good breeding they gained a pleasant significance from his good heart. He was ready to do anyone a kindness and seemed to find nothing too much trouble if he could thereby oblige his fellow man. He was eminently <i xml:lang="fr">serviable</i>. And it may be that this is a word for which there is no exact translation because the charming quality it denotes is not very common among our practical people. When Ashenden was ill for a couple of days <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington nursed him with devotion. Ashenden was embarrassed by the care he took of him and though racked with pain could not help laughing at the fussy attention with which <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington took his temperature, from his neatly packed valise extracted a whole regiment of tabloids and firmly doctored him; and he was touched by the trouble he gave himself to get from the dining-car the things that he thought Ashenden could eat. He did everything in the world for him but stop talking.</p>
			<p>It was only when he was dressing that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington was silent, for then his maidenly mind was singly occupied with the problem of changing his clothes before Ashenden without indelicacy. He was extremely modest. He changed his linen every day, neatly taking it out of his suitcase and neatly putting back what was soiled; but he performed miracles of dexterity in order during the process not to show an inch of bare skin. After a day or two Ashenden gave up the struggle to keep neat and clean in that dirty train, with one lavatory for the whole carriage, and soon was as grubby as the rest of the passengers; but <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington refused to yield to the difficulties. He performed his toilet with deliberation, notwithstanding the impatient persons who rattled the door-handle, and returned from the lavatory every morning washed, shining and smelling of soap. Once dressed, in his black coat, striped trousers and well-polished shoes, he looked as spruce as though he had just stepped out of his tidy little redbrick house in Philadelphia and was about to board the streetcar that would take him down town to his office. At one point of the journey it was announced that an attempt had been made to blow up a bridge and that there were disturbances at the next station over the river; it might be that the train would be stopped and the passengers turned adrift or taken prisoners. Ashenden, thinking he might be separated from his luggage, took the precaution to change into his thickest clothes so that if he had to pass the winter in Siberia he need suffer as little as necessary from the cold; but <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington would not listen to reason; he made no preparations for the possible experience and Ashenden had the conviction that if he spent three months in a Russian prison he would still preserve that smart and natty appearance. A troop of Cossacks boarded the train and stood on the platform of each carriage with their guns loaded, and the train rattled gingerly over the damaged bridge; then they came to the station at which they had been warned of danger, put on steam and dashed straight through it. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington was mildly satirical when Ashenden changed back into a light summer suit.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington was a keen business man. It was obvious that it would need someone very astute to overreach him and Ashenden was sure that his employers had been well-advised to send him on this errand. He would safeguard their interests with all his might and if he succeeded in driving a bargain with the Russians it would be a hard one. His loyalty to his firm demanded that. He spoke of the partners with affectionate reverence. He loved them and was proud of them; but he did not envy them because their wealth was great. He was quite content to work on a salary and thought himself adequately paid; so long as he could educate his boys and leave his widow enough to live on, what was money to him? He thought it a trifle vulgar to be rich. He looked upon culture as more important than money. He was careful of it and after every meal put down in his notebook exactly what it had cost him. His firm might be certain that he would not charge a penny more for his expenses than he had spent. But having discovered that poor people came to the station at the stopping places of the train to beg and seeing that the war had really brought them to destitution he took care before each halt to supply himself with ample small change and in a shamefaced way, mocking himself for being taken in by such impostors, distributed everything in his pocket.</p>
			<p>“Of course I know they don’t deserve it,” he said, “and I don’t do it for them. I do it entirely for my own peace of mind. I should feel so terribly badly if I thought some man really was hungry and I’d refused to give him the price of a meal.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington was absurd, but lovable. It was inconceivable that anyone should be rude to him, it would have seemed as dreadful as hitting a child; and Ashenden, chafing inwardly but with a pretence of amiability, suffered meekly and with a truly Christian spirit the affliction of the gentle, ruthless creature’s society. It took eleven days at that time to get from Vladivostok to Petrograd and Ashenden felt that he could not have borne another day. If it had been twelve he would have killed <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington.</p>
			<p>When at last (Ashenden tired and dirty, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington neat, sprightly and sententious) they reached the outskirts of Petrograd and stood at the window looking at the crowded houses of the city, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington turned to Ashenden and said:</p>
			<p>“Well, I never would have thought that eleven days in the train would pass so quickly. We’ve had a wonderful time. I’ve enjoyed your company and I know you’ve enjoyed mine. I’m not going to pretend I don’t know that I’m a pretty good conversationalist. But now we’ve come together like this we must take care to stay together. We must see as much of one another as we can while I’m in Petrograd.”</p>
			<p>“I shall have a great deal to do,” said Ashenden. “I’m afraid my time won’t be altogether my own.”</p>
			<p>“I know,” answered <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington cordially. “I expect to be pretty busy myself, but we can have breakfast together anyway and we’ll meet in the evening and compare notes. It would be too bad if we drifted apart now.”</p>
			<p>“Too bad,” sighed Ashenden.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>When Ashenden found himself in his bedroom at the hotel and, for the first time for it seemed an age, alone he sat down and looked about him. He had not the energy to start immediately to unpack. How many of these hotel bedrooms had he known since the beginning of the war, grand or shabby, in one place and one land after another! It seemed to him that he had been living in his luggage for as long as he could remember. He was weary. He asked himself how he was going to set about the work that he had been sent to do. He felt lost in the immensity of Russia and very solitary. He had protested when he was chosen for this mission, it looked too large an order, but his protests were ignored. He was chosen not because those in authority thought him particularly suited for the job, but because there was no one to be found who was more suited. There was a knock at the door and Ashenden, pleased to make use of the few words of the language he knew, called out in Russian. The door was opened. He sprang to his feet.</p>
			<p>“Come in, come in,” he cried. “I’m awfully glad to see you.”</p>
			<p>Three men entered. He knew them by sight, since they had travelled on the same boat with him from San Francisco to Yokohama, but following their instructions no communications had passed between them and Ashenden. They were Czechs, exiled from their country for their revolutionary activity and long settled in America, who had been sent over to Russia to help Ashenden in his mission and put him in touch with Professor <abbr epub:type="z3998:surname">Z.</abbr> whose authority over the Czechs in Russia was absolute. Their chief was a certain <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Egon Orth, a tall thin man, with a little grey head; he was minister to some church in the Middle West and a doctor of divinity; but had abandoned his cure to work for the liberation of his country, and Ashenden had the impression that he was an intelligent fellow who would not put too fine a point on matters of conscience. A parson with a fixed idea has this advantage over common men, that he can persuade himself of the Almighty’s approval for almost any goings on. <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Orth had a merry twinkle in his eye and a dry humour.</p>
			<p>Ashenden had had two secret interviews with him in Yokohama and had learnt that Professor <abbr epub:type="z3998:surname">Z.</abbr>, though eager to free his country from the Austrian rule and since he knew that this could only come about by the downfall of the Central Powers with the allies body and soul, yet had scruples; he would not do things that outraged his conscience, all must be straightforward and above board, and so some things that it was necessary to do had to be done without his knowledge. His influence was so great that his wishes could not be disregarded, but on occasion it was felt better not to let him know too much of what was going on.</p>
			<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> Orth had arrived in Petrograd a week before Ashenden and now put before him what he had learned of the situation. It seemed to Ashenden that it was critical and if anything was to be done it must be done quickly. The army was dissatisfied and mutinous, the Government under the weak Kerensky was tottering and held power only because no one else had the courage to seize it, famine was staring the country in the face and already the possibility had to be considered that the Germans would march on Petrograd. The ambassadors of Great Britain and the United States had been apprised of Ashenden’s coming, but his mission was secret even from them, and there were particular reasons why he could demand no assistance from them. He arranged with <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Orth to make an appointment with Professor <abbr epub:type="z3998:surname">Z.</abbr> so that he could learn his views and explain to him that he had the financial means to support any scheme that seemed likely to prevent the catastrophe that the Allied governments foresaw of Russia’s making a separate peace. But he had to get in touch with influential persons in all classes. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington with his business proposition and his letters to Ministers of State would be thrown in contact with members of the Government and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington wanted an interpreter. <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Orth spoke Russian almost as well as his own language and it struck Ashenden that he would be admirably suited to the post. He explained the circumstances to him and it was arranged that while Ashenden and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington were at luncheon <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Orth should come in, greeting Ashenden as though he had not seen him before, and be introduced to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington; then Ashenden, guiding the conversation, would suggest to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington that the heavens had sent in <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Orth the ideal man for his purpose.</p>
			<p>But there was another person on whom Ashenden had fixed as possibly useful to him and now he said: “Have you ever heard of a woman called Anastasia Alexandrovna Leonidov? She’s the daughter of Alexander Denisiev.”</p>
			<p>“I know all about him of course.”</p>
			<p>“I have reason to believe she’s in Petrograd. Will you find out where she lives and what she’s doing?”</p>
			<p>“Certainly.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> Orth spoke in Czech to one of the two men who accompanied him. They were sharp-looking fellows, both of them, one was tall and fair and the other was short and dark, but they were younger than <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Orth and Ashenden understood that they were there to do as he bade them. The man nodded, got up, shook hands with Ashenden and went out.</p>
			<p>“You shall have all the information possible this afternoon.”</p>
			<p>“Well, I think there’s nothing more we can do for the present,” said Ashenden. “To tell you the truth I haven’t had a bath for eleven days and I badly want one.”</p>
			<p>Ashenden had never quite made up his mind whether the pleasure of reflection was better pursued in a railway carriage or in a bath. So far as the act of invention was concerned he was inclined to prefer a train that went smoothly and not too fast, and many of his best ideas had come to him when he was thus traversing the plains of France; but for the delight of reminiscence or the entertainment of embroidery upon a theme already in his head he had no doubt that nothing could compare with a hot bath. He considered now, wallowing in soapy water like a water-buffalo in a muddy pond, the grim pleasantry of his relations with Anastasia Alexandrovna Leonidov.</p>
			<p>In these stories no more than the barest suggestion has been made that Ashenden was capable on occasions of the passion ironically called tender. The specialists in this matter, those charming creatures who make a business of what philosophers know is but a diversion, assert that writers, painters and musicians, all in short who are connected with the arts, in the relation of love, cut no very conspicuous figure. There is much cry but little wool. They rave or sigh, make phrases and strike many a romantic attitude, but in the end, loving art or themselves (which with them is one and the same thing) better than the object of their emotion, offer a shadow when the said object, with the practical common sense of the sex, demands a substance. It may be so and this may be the reason (never before suggested) why women in their souls look upon art with such a virulent hatred. Be this as it may Ashenden in the last twenty years had felt his heart go pit-a-pat because of one charming person after another. He had had a good deal of fun and had paid for it with a great deal of misery, but even when suffering most acutely from the pangs of unrequited love he had been able to say to himself, albeit with a wry face, after all, it’s grist to the mill.</p>
			<p>Anastasia Alexandrovna Leonidov was the daughter of a revolutionary who had escaped from Siberia after being sentenced to penal servitude for life and had settled in England. He was an able man and had supported himself for thirty years by the activity of a restless pen and had even made himself a distinguished position in English letters. When Anastasia Alexandrovna reached a suitable age she married Vladimir Semenovich Leonidov, also an exile from his native country, and it was after she had been married to him for some years that Ashenden made her acquaintance. It was at the time when Europe discovered Russia. Everyone was reading the Russian novelists, the Russian dancers captivated the civilised world, and the Russian composers set shivering the sensibility of persons who were beginning to want a change from Wagner. Russian art seized upon Europe with the virulence of an epidemic of influenza. New phrases became the fashion, new colours, new emotions, and the highbrows described themselves without a moment’s hesitation as members of the intelligentsia. It was a difficult word to spell but an easy one to say. Ashenden fell like the rest, changed the cushions of his sitting-room, hung an eikon on the wall, read Chekhov and went to the ballet.</p>
			<p>Anastasia Alexandrovna was by birth, circumstances and education very much a member of the intelligentsia. She lived with her husband in a tiny house near Regent’s Park and here all the literary folk in London might gaze with humble reverence at pale-faced bearded giants who leaned against the wall like caryatids taking a day off; they were revolutionaries to a man and it was a miracle that they were not in the mines of Siberia. Women of letters tremulously put their lips to a glass of vodka. If you were lucky and greatly favoured you might shake hands there with Diaghilev and now and again, like a peach-blossom wafted by the breeze, Pavlova herself hovered in and out. At this time Ashenden’s success had not been so great as to affront the highbrows, he had very distinctly been one of them in his youth, and though some already looked askance, others (optimistic creatures with a faith in human nature) still had hopes of him. Anastasia Alexandrovna told him to his face that he was a member of the intelligentsia. Ashenden was quite ready to believe it. He was in a state when he was ready to believe anything. He was thrilled and excited. It seemed to him that at last he was about to capture that illusive spirit of romance that he had so long been chasing. Anastasia Alexandrovna had fine eyes and a good, though for these days, too voluptuous figure, high cheekbones and a snub nose (this was very Tartar), a wide mouth full of large square teeth and a pale skin. She dressed somewhat flamboyantly. In her dark melancholy eyes Ashenden saw the boundless steppes of Russia, and the Kremlin with its pealing bells, and the solemn ceremonies of Easter at <abbr>St.</abbr> Isaac’s, and forests of silver beeches and the Nevsky Prospekt; it was astonishing how much he saw in her eyes. They were round and shining and slightly protuberant like those of a Pekinese. They talked together of Alyosha in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Brothers Karamazov</i>, of Natasha in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">War and Peace</i>, of Anna Karenina and of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Fathers and Sons</i>.</p>
			<p>Ashenden soon discovered that her husband was quite unworthy of her and presently learned that she shared his opinion. Vladimir Semenovich was a little man with a large, long head that looked as though it had been pulled like a piece of liquorice, and he had a great shock of unruly Russian hair. He was a gentle, unobtrusive creature and it was hard to believe that the Czarist government had really feared his revolutionary activities. He taught Russian and wrote for papers in Moscow. He was amiable and obliging. He needed these qualities, for Anastasia Alexandrovna was a woman of character: when she had a toothache Vladimir Semenovich suffered the agonies of the damned and when her heart was wrung by the suffering of her unhappy country Vladimir Semenovich might well have wished he had never been born. Ashenden could not help admitting that he was a poor thing, but he was so harmless that he conceived quite a liking for him, and when in due course he had disclosed his passion to Anastasia Alexandrovna and to his joy found it was returned he was puzzled to know what to do about Vladimir Semenovich. Neither Anastasia Alexandrovna nor he felt that they could live another minute out of one another’s pockets, and Ashenden feared that with her revolutionary views and all that she would never consent to marry him; but somewhat to his surprise, and very much to his relief, she accepted the suggestion with alacrity.</p>
			<p>“Would Vladimir Semenovich let himself be divorced, do you think?” he asked, as he sat on the sofa, leaning against cushions the colour of which reminded him of raw meat just gone bad, and held her hand.</p>
			<p>“Vladimir adores me,” she answered. “It’ll break his heart.”</p>
			<p>“He’s a nice fellow, I shouldn’t like him to be very unhappy. I hope he’ll get over it.”</p>
			<p>“He’ll never get over it. That is the Russian spirit. I know that when I leave him he’ll feel that he has lost everything that made life worth living for him. I’ve never known anyone so wrapped up in a woman as he is in me. But of course he wouldn’t want to stand in the way of my happiness. He’s far too great for that. He’ll see that when it’s a question of my own self-development I haven’t the right to hesitate. Vladimir will give me my freedom without question.”</p>
			<p>At that time the divorce law in England was even more complicated and absurd than it is now and in case she was not acquainted with its peculiarities Ashenden explained to Anastasia Alexandrovna the difficulties of the case. She put her hand gently on his.</p>
			<p>“Vladimir would never expose me to the vulgar notoriety of the divorce court. When I tell him that I have decided to marry you he will commit suicide.”</p>
			<p>“That would be terrible,” said Ashenden.</p>
			<p>He was startled, but thrilled. It was really very much like a Russian novel and he saw the moving and terrible pages, pages and pages, in which Dostoevsky would have described the situation. He knew the lacerations his characters would have suffered, the broken bottles of champagne, the visits to the gipsies, the vodka, the swoonings, the catalepsy and the long, long speeches everyone would have made. It was all very dreadful and wonderful and shattering.</p>
			<p>“It would make us horribly unhappy,” said Anastasia Alexandrovna, “but I don’t know what else he could do. I couldn’t ask him to live without me. He would be like a ship without a rudder or a car without a carburettor. I know Vladimir so well. He will commit suicide.”</p>
			<p>“How?” asked Ashenden, who had the realist’s passion for the exact detail.</p>
			<p>“He will blow his brains out.”</p>
			<p>Ashenden remembered <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Rosmerholm</i>. In his day he had been an ardent Ibsenite and had even flirted with the notion of learning Norwegian so that he might, by reading the master in the original, get at the secret essence of his thought. He had once seen Ibsen in the flesh drink a glass of Munich beer.</p>
			<p>“But do you think we could ever pass another easy hour if we had the death of that man on our conscience?” he asked. “I have a feeling that he would always be between us.”</p>
			<p>“I know we shall suffer, we shall suffer dreadfully,” said Anastasia Alexandrovna, “but how can we help it? Life is like that. We must think of Vladimir. There is his happiness to be considered too. He will prefer to commit suicide.”</p>
			<p>She turned her face away and Ashenden saw that the heavy tears were coursing down her cheeks. He was much moved. For he had a soft heart and it was dreadful to think of poor Vladimir lying there with a bullet in his brain.</p>
			<p>These Russians, what fun they have!</p>
			<p>But when Anastasia Alexandrovna had mastered her emotion she turned to him gravely. She looked at him with her humid, round and slightly protuberant eyes.</p>
			<p>“We must be quite sure that we’re doing the right thing,” she said. “I should never forgive myself if I’d allowed Vladimir to commit suicide and then found I’d made a mistake. I think we ought to make sure that we really love one another.”</p>
			<p>“But don’t you know?” exclaimed Ashenden in a low, tense voice. “I know.”</p>
			<p>“Let’s go over to Paris for a week and see how we get on. Then we shall know.”</p>
			<p>Ashenden was a trifle conventional and the suggestion took him by surprise. But only for a moment. Anastasia was wonderful. She was very quick and she saw the hesitation that for an instant troubled him.</p>
			<p>“Surely you have no bourgeois prejudices?” she said.</p>
			<p>“Of course not,” he assured her hurriedly, for he would much sooner have been thought knavish than bourgeois, “I think it’s a splendid idea.”</p>
			<p>“Why should a woman hazard her whole life on a throw? It’s impossible to know what a man is really like till you’ve lived with him. It’s only fair to give her the opportunity to change her mind before it’s too late.”</p>
			<p>“Quite so,” said Ashenden.</p>
			<p>Anastasia Alexandrovna was not a woman to let the grass grow under her feet and so having made their arrangements forthwith on the following Saturday they started for Paris.</p>
			<p>“I shall not tell Vladimir that I am going with you,” she said. “It would only distress him.”</p>
			<p>“It would be a pity to do that,” said Ashenden.</p>
			<p>“And if at the end of the week I come to the conclusion that we’ve made a mistake he need never know anything about it.”</p>
			<p>“Quite so,” said Ashenden.</p>
			<p>They met at Victoria Station.</p>
			<p>“What class have you got?” she asked him.</p>
			<p>“First.”</p>
			<p>“I’m glad of that. Father and Vladimir travel third on account of their principles, but I always feel sick on a train and I like to be able to lean my head on somebody’s shoulder. It’s easier in a first-class carriage.”</p>
			<p>When the train started Anastasia Alexandrovna said she felt dizzy, so she took off her hat and leaned her head on Ashenden’s shoulder. He put his arm round her waist.</p>
			<p>“Keep quite still, won’t you?” she said.</p>
			<p>When they got on to the boat she went down to the ladies’ cabin and at Calais was able to eat a very hearty meal, but when they got into the train she took off her hat again and rested her head on Ashenden’s shoulder. He thought he would like to read and took up a book.</p>
			<p>“Do you mind not reading?” she said. “I have to be held and when you turn the pages it makes me feel all funny.”</p>
			<p>Finally they reached Paris and went to a little hotel on the Left Bank that Anastasia Alexandrovna knew of. She said it had atmosphere. She could not bear those great big grand hotels on the other side; they were hopelessly vulgar and bourgeois.</p>
			<p>“I’ll go anywhere you like,” said Ashenden, “as long as there’s a bathroom.”</p>
			<p>She smiled and pinched his cheek.</p>
			<p>“How adorably English you are. Can’t you do without a bathroom for a week? My dear, my dear, you have so much to learn.”</p>
			<p>They talked far into the night about Maxim Gorki and Karl Marx, human destiny, love and the brotherhood of man; and drank innumerable cups of Russian tea, so that in the morning Ashenden would willingly have breakfasted in bed and got up for luncheon; but Anastasia Alexandrovna was an early riser. When life was so short and there was so much to do it was a sinful thing to have breakfast a minute after half-past eight. They sat down in a dingy little dining-room the windows of which showed no signs of having been opened for a month. It was full of atmosphere. Ashenden asked Anastasia Alexandrovna what she would have for breakfast.</p>
			<p>“Scrambled eggs,” she said.</p>
			<p>She ate heartily. Ashenden had already noticed that she had a healthy appetite. He supposed it was a Russian trait: you could not picture Anna Karenina making her midday meal off a bath-bun and a cup of coffee, could you?</p>
			<p>After breakfast they went to the Louvre and in the afternoon they went to the Luxembourg. They dined early in order to go to the <span xml:lang="fr">Comédie Française</span>; then they went to a Russian cabaret where they danced. When next morning at eight-thirty they took their places in the dining-room and Ashenden asked Anastasia Alexandrovna what she fancied, her reply was:</p>
			<p>“Scrambled eggs.”</p>
			<p>“But we had scrambled eggs yesterday,” he expostulated.</p>
			<p>“Let’s have them again today,” she smiled.</p>
			<p>“All right.”</p>
			<p>They spent the day in the same manner except that they went to the Carnavalet instead of the Louvre and the <span xml:lang="fr">Musée Guimet</span> instead of the Luxembourg. But when the morning after in answer to Ashenden’s enquiry Anastasia Alexandrovna again asked for scrambled eggs, his heart sank.</p>
			<p>“But we had scrambled eggs yesterday and the day before,” he said.</p>
			<p>“Don’t you think that’s a very good reason to have them again today?”</p>
			<p>“No, I don’t.”</p>
			<p>“Is it possible that your sense of humour is a little deficient this morning?” she asked. “I eat scrambled eggs every day. It’s the only way I like them.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, very well. In that case of course we’ll have scrambled eggs.”</p>
			<p>But the following morning he could not face them.</p>
			<p>“Will you have scrambled eggs as usual?” he asked her.</p>
			<p>“Of course,” she smiled affectionately, showing him two rows of large square teeth.</p>
			<p>“All right, I’ll order them for you; I shall have mine fried.”</p>
			<p>The smile vanished from her lips.</p>
			<p>“Oh?” She paused a moment. “Don’t you think that’s rather inconsiderate? Do you think it’s fair to give the cook unnecessary work? You English, you’re all the same, you look upon servants as machines. Does it occur to you that they have hearts like yours, the same feelings and the same emotions? How can you be surprised that the proletariat are seething with discontent when the bourgeoisie like you are so monstrously selfish?”</p>
			<p>“Do you really think that there’ll be a revolution in England if I have my eggs in Paris fried rather than scrambled?”</p>
			<p>She tossed her pretty head in indignation.</p>
			<p>“You don’t understand. It’s the principle of the thing. You think it’s a jest, of course I know you’re being funny, I can laugh at a joke as well as anyone, Chekhov was well-known in Russia as a humorist; but don’t you see what is involved? Your whole attitude is wrong. It’s a lack of feeling. You wouldn’t talk like that if you had been through the events of 1905 in Petersburg. When I think of the crowds in front of the Winter Palace kneeling in the snow while the Cossacks charged them, women and children! No, no, no.”</p>
			<p>Her eyes filled with tears and her face was all twisted with pain. She took Ashenden’s hand.</p>
			<p>“I know you have a good heart. It was just thoughtless on your part and we won’t say anything more about it. You have imagination. You’re very sensitive. I know. You’ll have your eggs done in the same way as mine, won’t you?”</p>
			<p>“Of course,” said Ashenden.</p>
			<p>He ate scrambled eggs for breakfast every morning after that. The waiter said: “<i xml:lang="fr">Monsieur aime les oeufs breuillés.</i>” At the end of the week they returned to London. He held Anastasia Alexandrovna in his arms, her head resting on his shoulder, from Paris to Calais and again from Dover to London. He reflected that the journey from New York to San Francisco took five days. When they arrived at Victoria and stood on the platform waiting for a cab she looked at him with her round, shining and slightly protuberant eyes.</p>
			<p>“We’ve had a wonderful time, haven’t we?” she said.</p>
			<p>“Wonderful.”</p>
			<p>“I’ve quite made up my mind. The experiment has justified itself. I’m willing to marry you whenever you like.”</p>
			<p>But Ashenden saw himself eating scrambled eggs every morning for the rest of his life. When he had put her in a cab, he called another for himself, went to the Cunard office and took a berth on the first ship that was going to America. No immigrant, eager for freedom and a new life, ever looked upon the statue of Liberty with more heartfelt thankfulness than did Ashenden, when on that bright and sunny morning his ship steamed into the harbour of New York.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>Some years had passed since then and Ashenden had not seen Anastasia Alexandrovna again. He knew that on the outbreak of the revolution in March she and Vladimir Semenovich had gone to Russia. It might be that they would be able to help him, in a way Vladimir Semenovich owed him his life, and he made up his mind to write to Anastasia Alexandrovna to ask if he might come to see her.</p>
			<p>When Ashenden went down to lunch he felt somewhat rested. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington was waiting for him and they sat down. They ate what was put before them.</p>
			<p>“Ask the waiter to bring us some bread,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington.</p>
			<p>“Bread?” replied Ashenden. “There’s no bread.”</p>
			<p>“I can’t eat without bread,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington.</p>
			<p>“I’m afraid you’ll have to. There’s no bread, no butter, no sugar, no eggs, no potatoes. There’s fish and meat and green vegetables, and that’s all.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington’s jaw dropped.</p>
			<p>“But this is war,” he said.</p>
			<p>“It looks very much like it.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington was for a moment speechless; then he said: “I’ll tell you what I’m going to do, I’m going to get through with my business as quick as I can and then I’m going to get out of this country. I’m sure <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Harrington wouldn’t like me to go without sugar or butter. I’ve got a very delicate stomach. The firm would never have sent me here if they’d thought I wasn’t going to have the best of everything.”</p>
			<p>In a little while <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Egon Orth came in and gave Ashenden an envelope. On it was written Anastasia Alexandrovna’s address. He introduced him to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington. It was soon clear that he was pleased with <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Egon Orth and so without further to-do he suggested that here was the perfect interpreter for him.</p>
			<p>“He talks Russian like a Russian. But he’s an American citizen, so that he won’t do you down. I’ve known him a considerable time and I can assure you that he’s absolutely trustworthy.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington was pleased with the notion and after luncheon Ashenden left them to settle the matter by themselves. He wrote a note to Anastasia Alexandrovna and presently received an answer to say that she was going to a meeting, but would look in at his hotel about seven. He awaited her with apprehension. Of course he knew now that he had not loved her, but Tolstoy and Dostoevsky, Rimsky-Korsakoff, Stravinsky and Bakst; but he was not quite sure if the point had occurred to her. When between eight and half-past she arrived he suggested that she should join <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington and him at dinner. The presence of a third party, he thought, would prevent any awkwardness their meeting might have; but he need not have had any anxiety, for five minutes after they had sat down to a plate of soup it was borne in upon him that the feelings of Anastasia Alexandrovna towards him were as cool as were his towards her. It gave him a momentary shock. It is very hard for a man, however modest, to grasp the possibility that a woman who has once loved him may love him no longer, and though of course he did not imagine that Anastasia Alexandrovna had languished for five years with a hopeless passion for him, he did think that by a heightening of colour, a flutter of the eyelashes, or a quiver of the lips she would betray the fact that she had still a soft place in her heart for him. Not at all. She talked to him as though he were a friend she was very glad to see again after an absence of a few days, but whose intimacy with her was purely social. He asked after Vladimir Semenovich.</p>
			<p>“He has been a disappointment to me,” she said. “I never thought he was a clever man, but I thought he was an honest one. He’s going to have a baby.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington, who was about to put a piece offish into his mouth, stopped, his fork in the air, and stared at Anastasia Alexandrovna with astonishment. In extenuation it must be explained that he had never read a Russian novel in his life. Ashenden, slightly perplexed too, gave her a questioning look.</p>
			<p>“I’m not the mother,” she said with a laugh. “I am not interested in that sort of thing. The mother is a friend of mine and a well-known writer on Political Economy. I do not think her views are sound, but I should be the last to deny that they deserve consideration. She has a good brain, quite a good brain.” She turned to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington. “Are you interested in Political Economy?”</p>
			<p>For once in his life <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington was speechless. Anastasia Alexandrovna gave them her views on the subject and they began to speak on the situation in Russia. She seemed to be on intimate terms with the leaders of the various political parties and Ashenden made up his mind to sound her on the possibility of her working with him. His infatuation had not blinded him to the fact that she was an extremely intelligent woman. After dinner he told <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington that he wished to talk business with Anastasia Alexandrovna and took her to a retired corner of the lounge. He told her all he thought necessary and found her interested and anxious to help. She had a passion for intrigue and a desire for power. When he hinted that he had command of large sums of money she saw at once that through him she might acquire an influence in the affairs of Russia. It tickled her vanity. She was immensely patriotic, but like many patriots she had an impression that her own aggrandisement tended to the good of her country. When they parted they had come to a working agreement.</p>
			<p>“That was a very remarkable woman,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington next morning when they met at breakfast.</p>
			<p>“Don’t fall in love with her,” smiled Ashenden.</p>
			<p>This, however, was not a matter on which <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington was prepared to jest.</p>
			<p>“I have never looked at a woman since I married <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Harrington,” he said. “That husband of hers must be a bad man.”</p>
			<p>“I could do with a plate of scrambled eggs,” said Ashenden, irrelevantly, for their breakfast consisted of a cup of tea without milk and a little jam instead of sugar.</p>
			<p>With Anastasia Alexandrovna to help him and <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Orth in the background, Ashenden set to work. Things in Russia were going from bad to worse. Kerensky, the head of the Provisional Government, was devoured by vanity and dismissed any minister who gave evidence of a capacity that might endanger his own position. He made speeches. He made endless speeches. At one moment there was a possibility that the Germans would make a dash for Petrograd. Kerensky made speeches. The food shortage grew more serious, the winter was approaching and there was no fuel. Kerensky made speeches. In the background the Bolsheviks were active, Lenin was hiding in Petrograd, it was said that Kerensky knew where he was, but dared not arrest him. He made speeches.</p>
			<p>It amused Ashenden to see the unconcern with which <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington wandered through this turmoil. History was in the making and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington minded his own business. It was uphill work. He was made to pay bribes to secretaries and underlings under the pretence that the ear of great men would be granted to him. He was kept waiting for hours in antechambers and then sent away without ceremony. When at last he saw the great men he found they had nothing to give him but idle words. They made him promises and in a day or two he discovered that the promises meant nothing. Ashenden advised him to throw in his hand and return to America; but <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington would not hear of it; his firm had sent him to do a particular job, and, by gum, he was going to do it or perish in the attempt. Then Anastasia Alexandrovna took him in hand. A singular friendship had arisen between the pair. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington thought her a very remarkable and deeply wronged woman; he told her all about his wife and his two sons, he told her all about the Constitution of the United States; she on her side told him all about Vladimir Semenovich, and she told him about Tolstoy, Turgenev and Dostoevsky. They had great times together. He said he couldn’t manage to call her Anastasia Alexandrovna, it was too much of a mouthful; so he called her Delilah. And now she placed her inexhaustible energy at his service and they went together to the persons who might be useful to him. But things were coming to a head. Riots broke out and the streets were growing dangerous. Now and then armoured cars filled with discontented reservists careered wildly along the Nevsky Prospekt and in order to show that they were not happy took potshots at the passersby. On one occasion when <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington and Anastasia Alexandrovna were in a tram together shots peppered the windows and they had to lie down on the floor for safety. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington was highly indignant.</p>
			<p>“An old fat woman was lying right on top of me and when I wriggled to get out Delilah caught me a clip on the side of the head and said, ‘Stop still, you fool.’ I don’t like your Russian ways, Delilah.”</p>
			<p>“Anyhow you stopped still,” she giggled.</p>
			<p>“What you want in this country is a little less art and a little more civilisation.”</p>
			<p>“You are bourgeoisie, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington, you are not a member of the intelligentsia.”</p>
			<p>“You are the first person who’s ever said that, Delilah. If I’m not a member of the intelligentsia I don’t know who is,” retorted <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington with dignity.</p>
			<p>Then one day when Ashenden was working in his room there was a knock at the door and Anastasia Alexandrovna stalked in followed somewhat sheepishly by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington. Ashenden saw that she was excited.</p>
			<p>“What’s the matter?” he asked.</p>
			<p>“Unless this man goes back to America he’ll get killed. You really must talk to him. If I hadn’t been there something very unpleasant might have happened to him.”</p>
			<p>“Not at all, Delilah,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington, with asperity. “I’m perfectly capable of taking care of myself and I wasn’t in the smallest danger.”</p>
			<p>“What is it all about?” asked Ashenden.</p>
			<p>“I’d taken <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington to the Lavra of Alexander Nevsky to see Dostoevsky’s grave,” said Anastasia Alexandrovna, “and on our way back we saw a soldier being rather rough with an old woman.”</p>
			<p>“Rather rough!” cried <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington. “There was an old woman walking along the sidewalk with a basket of provisions on her arm. Two soldiers came up behind her and one of them snatched the basket from her and walked off with it. She burst out screaming and crying, I don’t know what she was saying, but I can guess, and the other soldier took his gun and with the butt-end of it hit her over the head. Isn’t that right, Delilah?”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” she answered, unable to help smiling. “And before I could prevent it <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington jumped out of the cab and ran up to the soldier who had the basket, wrenched it from him and began to abuse the pair of them like pickpockets. At first they were so taken aback they didn’t know what to do and then they got in a rage. I ran after <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington and explained to them that he was a foreigner and drunk.”</p>
			<p>“Drunk?” cried <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington.</p>
			<p>“Yes, drunk. Of course a crowd collected. It looked as though it wasn’t going to be very nice.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington smiled with those large, pale-blue eyes of his.</p>
			<p>“It sounded to me as though you were giving them a piece of your mind, Delilah. It was as good as a play to watch you.”</p>
			<p>“Don’t be stupid, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington,” cried Anastasia, in a sudden fury, stamping her foot. “Don’t you know that those soldiers might very easily have killed you and me too, and not one of the bystanders would have raised a finger to help us?”</p>
			<p>“Me? I’m an American citizen, Delilah. They wouldn’t dare touch a hair of my head.”</p>
			<p>“They’d have difficulty in finding one,” said Anastasia Alexandrovna, who when she was in a temper had no manners. “But if you think Russian soldiers are going to hesitate to kill you because you’re an American citizen you’ll get a big surprise one of these days.”</p>
			<p>“Well, what happened to the old woman?” asked Ashenden.</p>
			<p>“The soldiers went off after a little and we went back to her.”</p>
			<p>“Still with the basket?”</p>
			<p>“Yes. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington clung on to that like grim death. She was lying on the ground with the blood pouring from her head. We got her into the cab and when she could speak enough to tell us where she lived we drove her home. She was bleeding dreadfully and we had some difficulty in staunching the blood.”</p>
			<p>Anastasia Alexandrovna gave <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington an odd look and to his surprise Ashenden saw him turn scarlet.</p>
			<p>“What’s the matter now?”</p>
			<p>“You see, we had nothing to bind her up with. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington’s handkerchief was soaked. There was only one thing about me that I could get off quickly and so I took off my⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>But before she could finish <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington interrupted her.</p>
			<p>“You need not tell <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ashenden what you took off. I’m a married man and I know ladies wear them, but I see no need to refer to them in general society.”</p>
			<p>Anastasia Alexandrovna giggled.</p>
			<p>“Then you must kiss me, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington. If you don’t I shall say.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington hesitated a moment, considering evidently the pros and cons of the matter, but he saw that Anastasia Alexandrovna was determined.</p>
			<p>“Go on then, you may kiss me, Delilah, though I’m bound to say I don’t see what pleasure it can be to you.”</p>
			<p>She put her arms round his neck and kissed him on both cheeks, then without a word of warning burst into a flood of tears.</p>
			<p>“You’re a brave little man, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington. You’re absurd but magnificent,” she sobbed.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington was less surprised than Ashenden would have expected him to be. He looked at Anastasia with a thin, quizzical smile and gently patted her.</p>
			<p>“Come, come, Delilah, pull yourself together. It gave you a nasty turn, didn’t it? You’re quite upset. I shall have terrible rheumatism in my shoulder if you go on weeping all over it.”</p>
			<p>The scene was ridiculous and touching. Ashenden laughed, but he had the beginnings of a lump in his throat.</p>
			<p>When Anastasia Alexandrovna had left them <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington sat in a brown study.</p>
			<p>“They’re very queer, these Russians. Do you know what Delilah did?” he said, suddenly. “She stood up in the cab, in the middle of the street, with people passing on both sides, and took her pants off. She tore them in two and gave me one to hold while she made a bandage of the other. I was never so embarrassed in my life.”</p>
			<p>“Tell me what gave you the idea of calling her Delilah?” smiled Ashenden.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington reddened a little.</p>
			<p>“She’s a very fascinating woman, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ashenden. She’s been deeply wronged by her husband and I naturally felt a great deal of sympathy for her. These Russians are very emotional people and I did not want her to mistake my sympathy for anything else. I told her I was very much attached to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Harrington.”</p>
			<p>“You’re not under the impression that Delilah was Potiphar’s wife?” asked Ashenden.</p>
			<p>“I don’t know what you mean by that, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ashenden,” replied <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington. “<abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Harrington has always given me to understand that I’m very fascinating to women, and I thought if I called our little friend Delilah it would make my position quite clear.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t think Russia’s any place for you, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington,” said Ashenden smiling. “If I were you I’d get out of it as quick as I could.”</p>
			<p>“I can’t go now. I’ve got them to agree to my terms at last and we’re going to sign next week. Then I shall pack my grip and go.”</p>
			<p>“I wonder if your signatures will be worth the paper they’re written on,” said Ashenden.</p>
			<p>He had at length devised a plan of campaign. It took him twenty-four hours’ hard work to code a telegram in which he put his scheme before the persons who had sent him to Petrograd. It was accepted and he was promised all the money he needed. Ashenden knew he could do nothing unless the Provisional Government remained in power for another three months; but winter was at hand and food was getting scarcer every day. The army was mutinous. The people clamoured for peace. Every evening at the Europe Ashenden drank a cup of chocolate with Professor <abbr epub:type="z3998:surname">Z.</abbr> and discussed with him how best to make use of his devoted Czechs. Anastasia Alexandrovna had a flat in a retired spot and here he had meetings with all manner of persons. Plans were drawn up. Measures were taken. Ashenden argued, persuaded, promised. He had to overcome the vacillation of one and wrestle with the fatalism of another. He had to judge who was resolute and who was self-sufficient, who was honest and who was infirm of purpose. He had to curb his impatience with the Russian verbosity; he had to be good-tempered with people who were willing to talk of everything but the matter in hand; he had to listen sympathetically to ranting and rhodomontade. He had to beware of treachery. He had to humour the vanity of fools and elude the greed of the ambitious. Time was pressing. The rumours grew hot and many of the activities of the Bolsheviks. Kerensky ran hither and thither like a frightened hen.</p>
			<p>Then the blow fell. On the night of November 7th, 1917, the Bolsheviks rose, Kerensky’s ministers were arrested and the Winter Palace was sacked by the mob; the reins of power were seized by Lenin and Trotsky.</p>
			<p>Anastasia Alexandrovna came to Ashenden’s room at the hotel early in the morning. Ashenden was coding a telegram. He had been up all night, first at the Smolny, and then at the Winter Palace. He was tired out. Her face was white and her shining brown eyes were tragic.</p>
			<p>“Have you heard?” she asked Ashenden.</p>
			<p>He nodded.</p>
			<p>“It’s all over then. They say Kerensky has fled. They never even showed fight.” Rage seized her. “The buffoon!” she screamed.</p>
			<p>At that moment there was a knock at the door and Anastasia Alexandrovna looked at it with sudden apprehension.</p>
			<p>“You know the Bolsheviks have got a list of people they’ve decided to execute. My name is on it, and it may be that yours is too.”</p>
			<p>“If it’s they and they want to come in they only have to turn the handle,” said Ashenden, smiling, but with ever so slightly odd a feeling at the pit of his stomach. “Come in.”</p>
			<p>The door was opened and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington stepped into the room. He was as dapper as ever, in his short black coat and striped trousers, his shoes neatly polished and a derby on his bald head. He took it off when he saw Anastasia Alexandrovna.</p>
			<p>“Oh, fancy finding you here so early. I looked in on my way out, I wanted to tell you my news. I tried to find you yesterday evening, but couldn’t. You didn’t come in to dinner.”</p>
			<p>“No, I was at a meeting,” said Ashenden.</p>
			<p>“You must both congratulate me, I got my signatures yesterday, and my business is done.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington beamed on them, the picture of self-satisfaction, and he arched himself like a bantam-cock who has chased away all rivals. Anastasia Alexandrovna burst into a sudden shriek of hysterical laughter. He stared at her in perplexity.</p>
			<p>“Why, Delilah, what is the matter?” he said.</p>
			<p>Anastasia laughed till the tears ran from her eyes and then began to sob in earnest. Ashenden explained.</p>
			<p>“The Bolsheviks have overthrown the Government. Kerensky’s ministers are in prison. The Bolsheviks are out to kill. Delilah says her name is on the list. Your minister signed your documents yesterday because he knew it did not matter what he did then. Your contracts are worth nothing. The Bolsheviks are going to make peace with Germany as soon as they can.”</p>
			<p>Anastasia Alexandrovna had recovered her self-control as quickly as she had lost it.</p>
			<p>“You had better get out of Russia as soon as you can, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington. It’s no place for a foreigner now and it may be that in a few days you won’t be able to.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington looked from one to the other.</p>
			<p>“O my!” he said. “O my!” It seemed inadequate. “Are you going to tell me that that Russian minister was just making a fool of me?”</p>
			<p>Ashenden shrugged his shoulders.</p>
			<p>“How can one tell what he was thinking of? He may have a keen sense of humour and perhaps he thought it funny to sign a fifty-million-dollar contract yesterday when there was every chance of his being stood against the wall and shot today. Anastasia Alexandrovna’s right, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington, you’d better take the first train that’ll get you to Sweden.”</p>
			<p>“And what about you?”</p>
			<p>“There’s nothing for me to do here any more. I’m cabling for instructions and I shall go as soon as I get leave. The Bolsheviks have got in ahead of us and the people I was working with will have their work cut out to save their lives.”</p>
			<p>“Boris Petrovich was shot this morning,” said Anastasia Alexandrovna with a frown.</p>
			<p>They both looked at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington and he stared at the floor. His pride in this achievement of his was shattered and he sagged like a pricked balloon. But in a minute he looked up. He gave Anastasia Alexandrovna a little smile and for the first time Ashenden noticed how attractive and kindly his smile was. There was something peculiarly disarming about it.</p>
			<p>“If the Bolsheviks are after you, Delilah, don’t you think you’d better come with me? I’ll take care of you and if you like to come to America I’m sure <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Harrington would be glad to do anything she could for you.”</p>
			<p>“I can see <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Harrington’s face if you arrived in Philadelphia with a Russian refugee,” laughed Anastasia Alexandrovna. “I’m afraid it would need more explaining than you could ever manage. No, I shall stay here.”</p>
			<p>“But if you’re in danger?”</p>
			<p>“I’m a Russian. My place is here. I will not leave my country when most my country needs me.”</p>
			<p>“That is the bunk, Delilah,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington very quietly.</p>
			<p>Anastasia Alexandrovna had spoken with deep emotion, but now with a little start she shot a sudden quizzical look at him.</p>
			<p>“I know it is, Samson,” she answered. “To tell you the truth I think we’re all going to have a hell of a time, God knows what’s going to happen, but I want to see; I wouldn’t miss a minute of it for the world.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington shook his head.</p>
			<p>“Curiosity is the bane of your sex, Delilah,” he said.</p>
			<p>“Go along and do your packing, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington,” said Ashenden, smiling, “and then we’ll take you to the station. The train will be besieged.”</p>
			<p>“Very well, I’ll go. And I shan’t be sorry either. I haven’t had a decent meal since I came here and I’ve done a thing I never thought I should have to do in my life, I’ve drunk my coffee without sugar and when I’ve been lucky enough to get a little piece of black bread I’ve had to eat it without butter. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Harrington will never believe me when I tell her what I’ve gone through. What this country wants is organisation.”</p>
			<p>When he left them Ashenden and Anastasia Alexandrovna talked over the situation. Ashenden was depressed because all his careful schemes had come to nothing, but Anastasia Alexandrovna was excited and she hazarded every sort of guess about the outcome of this new revolution. She pretended to be very serious, but in her heart she looked upon it all very much as a thrilling play. She wanted more and more things to happen. Then there was another knock at the door and before Ashenden could answer <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington burst in.</p>
			<p>“Really the service at this hotel is a scandal,” he cried heatedly. “I’ve been ringing my bell for fifteen minutes and I can’t get anyone to pay the smallest attention to me.”</p>
			<p>“Service?” exclaimed Anastasia Alexandrovna. “There is not a servant left in the hotel.”</p>
			<p>“But I want my washing. They promised to let me have it back last night.”</p>
			<p>“I’m afraid you haven’t got much chance of getting it now,” said Ashenden.</p>
			<p>“I’m not going to leave without my washing. Four shirts, two union suits, a pair of pyjamas, and four collars. I wash my handkerchiefs and socks in my room. I want my washing and I’m not going to leave this hotel without it.”</p>
			<p>“Don’t be a fool,” cried Ashenden. “What you’ve got to do is to get out of here while the going’s good. If there are no servants to get it you’ll just have to leave your washing behind you.”</p>
			<p>“Pardon me, sir, I shall do nothing of the kind. I’ll go and fetch it myself. I’ve suffered enough at the hands of this country and I’m not going to leave four perfectly good shirts to be worn by a lot of dirty Bolsheviks. No, sir. I do not leave Russia till I have my washing.”</p>
			<p>Anastasia Alexandrovna stared at the floor for a moment; then with a little smile looked up. It seemed to Ashenden that there was something in her that responded to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington’s futile obstinacy. In her Russian way she understood that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington could not leave Petrograd without his washing. His insistence had given it the value of a symbol.</p>
			<p>“I’ll go downstairs and see if I can find anybody about who knows where the laundry is and if I can, I’ll go with you and you can bring your washing away with you.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington unbent. He answered with that sweet and disarming smile of his.</p>
			<p>“That’s terribly kind of you, Delilah. I don’t mind if it’s ready or not, I’ll take it just as it is.”</p>
			<p>Anastasia Alexandrovna left them.</p>
			<p>“Well, what do you think of Russia and the Russians now?” <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington asked Ashenden.</p>
			<p>“I’m fed up with them. I’m fed up with Tolstoy, I’m fed up with Turgenev and Dostoevsky, I’m fed up with Chekhov. I’m fed up with the Intelligentsia. I hanker after people who know their mind from one minute to another, who mean what they say an hour after they’ve said it, whose word you can rely on; I’m sick of fine phrases, and oratory and attitudinising.”</p>
			<p>Ashenden, bitten by the prevailing ill, was about to make a speech when he was interrupted by a rattle as of peas on a drum. In the city, so strangely silent, it sounded abrupt and odd.</p>
			<p>“What’s that?” asked <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington.</p>
			<p>“Rifle firing. On the other side of the river, I should think.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington gave a funny little look. He laughed, but his face was a trifle pale; he did not like it, and Ashenden did not blame him.</p>
			<p>“I think it’s high time I got out. I shouldn’t so much mind for myself, but I’ve got a wife and children to think of. I haven’t had a letter from <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Harrington for so long I’m a bit worried.” He paused an instant. “I’d like you to know <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Harrington, she’s a very wonderful woman. She’s the best wife a man ever had. Until I came here I’d not been separated from her for more than three days since we were married.”</p>
			<p>Anastasia Alexandrovna came back and told them that she had found the address.</p>
			<p>“It’s about forty minutes’ walk from here and if you’ll come now I’ll go with you,” she said.</p>
			<p>“I’m ready.”</p>
			<p>“You’d better look out,” said Ashenden. “I don’t believe the streets are very healthy today.”</p>
			<p>Anastasia Alexandrovna looked at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington.</p>
			<p>“I must have my washing, Delilah,” he said. “I should never rest in peace if I left it behind me and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Harrington would never let me hear the last of it.”</p>
			<p>“Come on then.”</p>
			<p>They set out and Ashenden went on with the dreary business of translating into a very complicated code the shattering news he had to give. It was a long message, and then he had to ask for instructions upon his own movements. It was a mechanical job and yet it was one in which you could not allow your attention to wander. The mistake of a single figure might make a whole sentence incomprehensible.</p>
			<p>Suddenly his door was burst open and Anastasia Alexandrovna flung into the room. She had lost her hat and was dishevelled. She was panting. Her eyes were starting out of her head and she was obviously in a state of great excitement.</p>
			<p>“Where’s <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington?” she cried. “Isn’t he here?”</p>
			<p>“No.”</p>
			<p>“Is he in his bedroom?”</p>
			<p>“I don’t know. Why, what’s the matter? We’ll go and look if you like. Why didn’t you bring him along with you?”</p>
			<p>They walked down the passage and knocked at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington’s door; there was no answer; they tried the handle; the door was locked.</p>
			<p>“He’s not there.”</p>
			<p>They went back to Ashenden’s room. Anastasia Alexandrovna sank into a chair.</p>
			<p>“Give me a glass of water, will you? I’m out of breath. I’ve been running.”</p>
			<p>She drank the water Ashenden poured out for her. She gave a sudden sob.</p>
			<p>“I hope he’s all right. I should never forgive myself if he was hurt. I was hoping he would have got here before me. He got his washing all right. We found the place. There was only an old woman there and they didn’t want to let us take it, but we insisted. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington was furious because it hadn’t been touched. It was exactly as he had sent it. They’d promised it last night and it was still in the bundle that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington had made himself. I said that was Russia and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington said he preferred coloured people. I’d led him by side streets because I thought it was better, and we started to come back again. We passed at the top of a street and at the bottom of it I saw a little crowd. There was a man addressing them.</p>
			<p>“ ‘Let’s go and hear what he’s saying,’ I said.</p>
			<p>“I could see they were arguing. It looked exciting. I wanted to know what was happening.</p>
			<p>“ ‘Come along, Delilah,’ he said. ‘Let us mind out own business.’</p>
			<p>“ ‘You go back to the hotel and do your packing. I’m going to see the fun,’ I said.</p>
			<p>“I ran down the street and he followed me. There were about two or three hundred people there and a student was addressing them. There were some working men and they were shouting at him. I love a row and I edged my way into the crowd. Suddenly we heard the sound of shots and before you could realise what was happening two armoured cars came dashing down the street. There were soldiers in them and they were firing as they went. I don’t know why. For fun, I suppose, or because they were drunk. We all scattered like a lot of rabbits. We just ran for our lives. I lost <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington. I can’t make out why he isn’t here. Do you think something has happened to him?”</p>
			<p>Ashenden was silent for a while.</p>
			<p>“We’d better go out and look for him,” he said. “I don’t know why the devil he couldn’t leave his washing.”</p>
			<p>“I understand, I understand so well.”</p>
			<p>“That’s a comfort,” said Ashenden irritably. “Let’s go.”</p>
			<p>He put on his hat and coat, and they walked downstairs. The hotel seemed strangely empty. They went out into the street. There was hardly anyone to be seen. They walked along. The trams were not running and the silence in the great city was uncanny. The shops were closed. It was quite startling when a motorcar dashed by at breakneck speed. The people they passed looked frightened and downcast. When they had to go through a main thoroughfare they hastened their steps. A lot of people were there and they stood about irresolutely as though they did not know what to do next. Reservists in their shabby grey were walking down the middle of the roadway in little bunches. They did not speak. They looked like sheep looking for their shepherd. Then they came to the street down which Anastasia Alexandrovna had run, but they entered it from the opposite end. A number of windows had been broken by the wild shooting. It was quite empty. You could see where the people had scattered, for strewn about were articles they had dropped in their haste, books, a man’s hat, a lady’s bag and a basket. Anastasia Alexandrovna touched Ashenden’s arm to draw his attention: sitting on the pavement, her head bent right down to her lap, was a woman and she was dead. A little way on two men had fallen together. They were dead too. The wounded, one supposed, had managed to drag themselves away or their friends had carried them. Then they found <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington. His derby had rolled in the gutter. He lay on his face, in a pool of blood, his bald head, with its prominent bones, very white; his neat black coat smeared and muddy. But his hand was clenched tight on the parcel that contained four shirts, two union suits, a pair of pyjamas and four collars. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington had not let his washing go.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
